CIAT’s mission statement, as approved by the Board (1999), reads: “To reduce hunger and
poverty in the tropics through collaborative research that improves agricultural productivity and
natural resources management.” The global environment in which CIAT operates has been
changing rapidly. There has been a shift from philanthropic donors supporting science to
alleviate global hunger to one of development‐focused investors targeting poverty alleviation.
While CIAT is well positioned with core competencies and capacity to operate effectively in
this more demand‐driven environment, it places a new set of pressures on the strategic focus
and management of the center. CIAT’s current strategic plan is no longer appropriate. It sets
out generic research targets that are associated with specific system components rather than
identifying target agroecosystems and issues or problems where integrated CIAT research
could have focus, comparative advantage, and measurable impact. CIAT has received
numerous calls to sharpen research focus and integrate its research activities. It has
undertaken a series of re‐arrangements of its research activities but has been unable to
achieve a form that can integrate its suite of component skills and focus them at critical issues
in defined target agroecosystems. It is timely to revisit research targets and clarify CIAT’s
strategic research agenda. [Rec. #1]
The more demand‐driven research environment has generated opportunities for enhanced
research for development funding. Funding for special projects has risen substantially at
CIAT over the past 7 years. At the same time unrestricted funding has diminished. While this
gives the appearance of good adaptation by CIAT to this changed funding environment, and
led to temporary growth in staffing, shortcomings in managing this transition have
precipitated a financial “crisis” at CIAT. This has generated the need for significant
downsizing over the past few years, resulting in a 2007 scientific staff equal in number to that
which existed in 2000. It is now a priority issue at CIAT to overcome governance and
management shortcomings that have allowed such an extended financial crisis that has
engulfed its operations.
Hence, the two major themes for deliberation by this EPMR Panel were: (i) clarifying CIAT’s strategic
research agenda, and (ii) overcoming governance and management shortcomings.Research programs at CIAT and quality of science
In 2007, in response to CCER recommendations, CIAT moved from a project approach to a
product‐line approach of implementing its research agenda. It has implemented this
approach within its recently institutionalized Research for Development Challenge (RDC)
structure. Research at CIAT is currently organized in two RDCs – People and Agroecosystems
and Sharing the Benefits of Agrobiodiversity. The Agrobiodiversity RDC contains all the
germplasm related products while the Agroecosystems RDC contains the range of other
disciplines involved in system‐based research for development.  
The Panel found generally high quality and relevance of science at CIAT, although this varied
somewhat among research areas. CIAT ranked highly among CGIAR Centers in publications
and citations and had an impressive array of germplasm products coming from its core beans,
cassava, forages and rice programs. In addition, the Germplasm Research Unit was rated asamong the best in the world and activities at the Tropical Soil Biology Institute (TSBF) were
rated as exceptional. It was more difficult to assess livelihood impacts of use of CIAT research
due to the lack of availability of impact assessment studies. The Panel suggested
strengthening this activity.
The Agroecosystems RDC incorporates product lines for Markets, Institutions and
Livelihoods and for Integrated Soil Fertility Management, which houses the TSBF Institute of
CIAT in Africa. The Panel was struck by the clear contrast in approach between these two
product lines. The Markets product line is discipline oriented with a focus on system
components, while the Integrated Management line is problem/outcome oriented and seeks
the disciplinary expertise needed for targeted interdisciplinary research for development at
the whole system level. The Panel is of the view that the implementation of the product line
concept, as manifested in the Markets line, will not achieve the interdisciplinary interaction
required to achieve the development outcomes of CIAT’s mission. On the contrary, it is clear
that TSBF‐CIAT has a well‐developed research strategy based on integrated multi‐
disciplinary teams to undertake system‐based action research and innovation that is targeted
at priority development outcomes. The Panel noted that this multi‐  and inter‐disciplinary
approach, which clusters the relevant set of component disciplinary product lines, exemplifies
the concept of system level “outcome line” required by research for development across all of
CIAT. [Rec. #2]
The Agrobiodiversity RDC incorporates product lines for beans, cassava, forages and rice.  Its
activities in germplasm improvement can be more readily aligned with the recent
implementation of the product line approach. These programs generate critical germplasm
products for use across the target agroecosystems forming the research for development
agenda of CIAT. The germplasm products are a critical component in pursuing improvement
in the broader integrated system. The Panel noted few areas where these germplasm
programs could be strengthened, some issues with free access to germplasm related to some
contractual arrangements, and a need to clarify arrangements on cassava with IITA [Rec. #3‐7,
10].
CIAT in the Regions
CIAT has significantly expanded its regional operations in Africa and Asia, while reducing its
activity in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), since the time of the previous EPMR
(2000). Research for development teams in Africa (such as the Pan‐Africa Bean Research
Alliance‐PABRA and TSBF) and Asia were generating observable impacts via integrated
interdisciplinary teams and the Panel was highly impressed with their activities and mode of
operation. They have developed strong collaborative partnerships with local and
international agencies in pursuing impact targets. The Panel observed similar potential in
LAC, which was not being realized due to diminishing support from CIAT, and
recommended action towards a rejuvenated regional strategy for LAC. [Rec. #8]  
The system‐based and impact target focused project teams found in the regions exemplified
the integrated multidisciplinary approach required to achieve outcomes. They combine broad
system diagnosis (production systems, markets, institutions) with use of targeted entry points
(often based on CIAT germplasm products and associated markets) to generate development
impact. This incorporates relationships with local NARS to enhance scaling out opportunities.
The Panel noted that these regional teams were already operating effectively as “outcome