The Panel considered the concept of “outcome line” and how it could be used to generate
strategic focus for the effective future functioning of CIAT. An outcome line was identified as
a body of research for development that had a clearly identified impact target in a priority
agroecosystem. The identification of targets and agroecosystems forms a critical part of
revitalizing the CIAT strategic plan, while the design of the teams required for each
associated outcome line would provide the means for CIAT to integrate its component
disciplinary competencies and product lines to greatest effect. Outcome line teams would be
arranged within CIAT regions and draw on disciplinary expertise as required. The core
expertise in Agrobiodiversity underpins the outcome lines by generating improved
germplasm products that feed into the outcome lines. Hence, the Panel recommended this
concept as a means to focus planning of the strategic research agenda for CIAT. This
functionality would enable entry and exit of outcome lines. In that regard the Panel noted that
current CIAT activity in tropical fruits is an example of a pilot outcome line within the LAC
region. The Panel further discussed the qualities of research leaders needed for the outcome
line approach.   
The Panel then proceeded to consider the structural arrangements of CIAT’s research
resources needed to achieve this functionality. This involved some small changes to the
existing organizational chart. It was recommended to organize research via four programs  ‐ 
Agrobiodiversity, Asia, Africa and LAC – to deliver the germplasm products and house the
outcome lines. In the Panel’s view, enhancing responsibility and authority of the four
program leaders would facilitate effective decisions on disciplinary mix in research teams,
allow creativity in research leadership, and clarify reporting relationships for scientists in
research teams. [Rec. #12]
The implications of this structure related to aligning existing teams in Africa into a single
coordinated regional program, and discontinuing the Agroecosystems RDC program and the
Public‐Private‐Partnerships directorate. The four programs (Agrobiodiversity and the three
Regions) are vested with the responsibility of implementing germplasm products and
outcome lines that will have been clearly defined in the renewal of the strategic plan. The
outcome lines in the regions will require disciplinary expertise from the disciplines
represented in the existing Agroecosystems RDC and existing staff might fill some of these
roles. However, the Panel identified the discontinuation of the Agroecosystems RDC as the
primary source of research savings from core.  
The recommended organization structure included strengthening the DDG‐Research Office
with three staff positions – proposal development and IP manager; senior economist/impact
specialist; spatial analysis specialist.
Organization and management
CIAT’s organizational structure has changed a number of times since the last EPMR (2000).
The current Management Team consists of the DG, the DDG‐Research, the DDG‐Corporate
Services, and the Director of Public‐Private Partnerships. The team has not operated
4
effectively as a group in recent years. It has lacked the full mix of skills needed for sound
institutional decision‐making – in particular in finance and management. And it has not
strategically led CIAT through the period of financial crisis. Only 32% of staff surveyed by the
EPMR believe that relations between staff and management are positive, and just 23% have
confidence in CIAT leadership (DG and the Board). The Panel considers the defection of key
scientists out of frustration with the prolonged period of instability to be the number one risk
to CIAT’s future. The Panel recommends that the CIAT Board take rapid and bold actions to
reconstitute CIAT leadership and management in the short term and that the implementation
of this recommendation be followed up by 1 March 2008 in close consultation with the
CGIAR. [Rec. #13]
The Panel believes that CIAT Board and management must improve procedures for balancing
research ambition with financial reality. CIAT’s failure to focus on building reserves and the
over‐expansion of its research mission left it vulnerable to financial downturns in 2005, from
which it has not yet recovered. The Panel believes that the Finance Department requires major
adjustments, including the establishment of the position of a Finance Director that reports
directly to the DG and recruitment of an experienced financial manager with a professional
accountancy qualification. The Panel also recommends that the recently established Grants
Management Unit be abolished and its functions disaggregated. [Rec. #14]
Despite the difficult challenges that CIAT currently faces, the Panel found that CIAT staff
remain committed to the center’s mission and their work, and are proud of the center’s
accomplishments. However, the financial situation and the nature of subsequent downsizing
decisions have been detrimental to morale. While CIAT spent some US$10M in “phase out
costs” associated with staff terminations and restructuring since 2003, human resource
management has lacked the needed attention of CIAT leadership. CIAT’s human resource
policies and procedures, and related management systems are in need of updating. The Panel
recommends that human resource management become a priority at CIAT, and that this
should entail aligning human resource planning with broader program and financial
planning efforts, streamlining human resource business processes to improve service
delivery, and renewing policies and their consistent application. [Rec. #15]