Revising the vision and strategic direction for CIAT  
The Panel was provided with a brief paper written in early 2007 outlining the current
thinking of the BOT and Management on the vision and strategic direction for CIAT. The
paper reinforced the mission of CIAT and sets out a number of aspirations for the institute
(see box ‐ CIAT’s Strategic Vision (2007) ‐ in the following page).
This new strategy paper discusses how CIAT would achieve the required focus and
integration by evolving from a project based, into a targeted, product‐based, organization.
The definition of the product concept, as recommended in the recent CCER on
Agrobiodiversity, is detailed and implementation steps in the product process cycle are
presented. Further, in relation to financial sustainability of the institute, the paper presents
further aspirations that by 2009 CIAT would be a center where:
• Administration and management are entirely supported by overheads, and
• Mainstream research, including product lines and challenge programs, is almost entirely
supported by special projects.
It is the view of the Panel that the process to develop a new strategic plan for CIAT is a
welcome, although overdue, development. Any planning process will need to result in far
clearer targets for the institute and operational processes to achieve them. Hence, the Panel recommends that CIAT management initiate as a matter of urgency a
strategic planning process that re‐invigorates the mission of the institute, analyses the
environment in which it operates, enumerates its comparative advantages and strengths,
and identifies the major problem areas and target agroecosystems to focus its research for
development agenda on achievable outcomes.  
Specific requirements in relation to this recommendation will be considered throughout this
report as the Panel analyzes the main issues at CIAT requiring attention of this EPMR. 
Strategic Vision (2007). The enduring mission of CIAT is to contribute to reducing hunger and poverty
in the tropics through collaborative research that improves agricultural productivity and natural resource
management. CIAT will maintain its reputation and capacity for integrating the key scientific competencies
required to make significant progress in attaining its mission. To achieve impact, we recognize the
importance of working in effective partnerships with national programs, civil society organizations, and the
private sector to conduct research that produces international public goods including technologies,
methodologies and knowledge of direct relevance that are being taken up by intended users to improving the
livelihoods of the rural poor.
CIAT has a unique comparative advantage in genetic improvement of its germplasm collection in beans,
cassava and tropical forages and will use its 40 years of experience and knowledge on how to add value to
that collection for the benefit of the poor. CIAT reaches end‐users through integration of molecular biology,
breeding, pathogen ecology, integrated soil fertility management and the development of effective impact
pathways using decision support, participatory approaches and equitably linking poor farmers to developing
market. Thus CIAT will focus its efforts on applied research outputs of highest potential benefit for the
livelihoods of the poor in the tropics.
These outputs will be co‐developed with and disseminated through partners in Latin America, Sub‐Saharan
Africa, and Southeast Asia. CIAT will host the leading center of excellence for research on rice in Latin
America through a public/private partnership and will facilitate the emergence of other similar research
partnerships in cassava, beans and forages.
CIAT’s continuing ability to have a significant impact on the lives of the poor and to sustain the
environments on which they depend, using improved germplasm, can only be and will continue to be
accomplished via an integrated interdisciplinary approach that includes the following three areas:
(i) CIAT will excel in integrated land, soil fertility, and water management research from a
landscape/livelihoods perspective particularly in Eastern and Southern Africa with the TSBF institute of
CIAT taking the lead in this activity.
(ii) CIAT will be among the world leaders in the use of spatial analysis focused on deployment of genetic
resources and their interaction with markets and other agricultural natural resources in the tropics.
(iii) CIAT will be an active contributor to a global CGIAR partnership on market chain analysis and high
value products as well as to a system wide partnership on natural resource management and agriculture in
the Amazon basin.
CIAT will also continue to develop the potential of students and young professionals, Overcoming governance and management shortcomings
The priority issue for CIAT is to overcome the extended financial “crisis” that has engulfed its
operations over the period since the last EPMR. The key strategic issue arising for this EPMR
relates to the effectiveness of the governance and control environment at CIAT. The nature of
internal controls and risk management processes and the role of the Board and management
in oversight will be analyzed as a means to identify strategies for effective and sustainable
recovery. Financial challenges are sure to befall any center; skilled direction must be capable
of extracting a center from a lingering state of “crisis” so that it can carry out its mission.
The organizational stress that has resulted from the financial “crisis” has exposed issues in
center leadership and management. The need to terminate international and national staff has
influenced morale and staff perceptions of center leaders. These cuts have come in several
rounds, yet CIAT remains in financial “crisis” mode. This leaves many employees on short
term contracts waiting for the next round and leaves CIAT vulnerable to the loss of key
scientists. What effect has this situation had on delivering outcomes? How does the staff view
the credibility and competency of the management and Board? Are there strategies that can
re‐build organizational trust and re‐invigorate a culture of commitment? How does CIAT
manage its human resources to maintain quality research leadership and skills in this
environment? Have staffing cuts and cost savings been strategically balanced between
management, administration and research staff? Is the significant investment of core funds in
infrastructure at headquarters still required?  
The evolution of CIAT from a Latin American organization to a global organization has
exposed issues in human resource management. Analysis of these issues will be used to
inform recommendations on strategies for more effective human resource management. This
issue has also influenced interactions with the host country for CIAT headquarters. What
strategies can management adopt to re‐build relationships with Colombia? What should be
the role of CIAT in the broader Latin America region in this new environment?
Clarifying CIAT’s strategic research agenda
It is clear from the trajectory outlined earlier in this chapter (section 2.2) that CIAT does not
have a stable strategic platform that informs and underpins implementation of its research
agenda. Developing such a stable platform, which must retain flexibility for initiation andcessation of research thrusts, is urgently required and forms the basis of the first
recommendation of this report.  
CIAT has very recently (2007) moved to a product line approach of implementing its research
agenda. Moreover, it has implemented this within a recently institutionalized Research for
Development Challenge structure. Hence, products have been aligned with outputs in the
standard annual planning (MTP) process. Is this the most appropriate design to achieve
outcomes where targeted interdisciplinary effort is often required? Does it capture the full
potential of the product concept presented in the CCER on Agrobiodiversity? How can CIAT
sharpen its delivery of integrated research for development? How can CIAT’s mix of
disciplinary expertise be better utilized? What is the role of the regions in this process? What
is the best way to link CIAT’s detailed research in specific product/process areas to
development outcomes? How should CIAT position itself in the research‐development
continuum? How should CIAT manage its relationships with NARS in this positioning?
CIAT has been forced to move to an operating position that is more responsive to needs of
donors. What strategies should CIAT adopt in balancing strategic thrusts with funding
opportunism? How should CIAT allocate its core resources to best effect in this environment?
How should it prioritize allocation decisions among germplasm conservation, regions, core
research competencies, and new research areas (such as high value commodities)? How
should CIAT use impact assessment in this process? In what key disciplinary areas should
CIAT invest in detailed product/process research? How does it balance its investment
between basic science and achieving outcomes? How does CIAT sustain its scientific strength
in genetics and Agrobiodiversity? How does CIAT deal with natural resource sustainability
aspirations? Should resource conservation issues be a direct target or part of a package
associated with livelihood improvement?
Many of the outcomes sought by CIAT involve interactions with market forces and the
private sector. How much expertise does CIAT require in‐house to make these linkages work
effectively for development outcomes? How far into market systems should CIAT delve?
How should CIAT manage its relationships with the private sector? What are the implications
of these relationships on IP management? CIAT is engaged in a number of CGIAR system
wide initiatives. What are the overheads and opportunity costs associated with this
engagement? How should CIAT decide when to allocate capacity to these initiatives?
These and numerous other specific associated questions will be addressed by the EPMR Panel
throughout this report. It is our intent that the reflections and recommendations presented in this
report will be of assistance to CIAT in dealing with the two main areas of issues identified  ‐ 
Overcoming Governance and Management Shortcomings, and Clarifying the Center’s Strategic
Agenda. The recommendations will incorporate specific details and processes required for
implementation wherever feasible.