CIAT is a not‐for‐profit research and development organization supported by the
Consultative Group on Agricultural Research (CGIAR) along with fourteen other
international centers. CIAT is dedicated to research for overcoming technological constraints
to agricultural productivity and for sustainable management of natural resources in
developing countries of tropical regions, aiming at reducing hunger and poverty. CIAT was
founded in 1967 as an autonomous institution and in 1971 joined the CGIAR, being one of the
four “founding” Centers that were established in response to the food crisis of the 1960s.
CIAT’s initial mandate was to “generate and deliver, in collaboration with national and
regional institutions, improved technology, which will contribute to increased production,
productivity and quality of specific food commodities in the tropics – principally countries in
Latin America and the Caribbean – thereby enabling producers and consumers, especially
those with limited resources, to increase their purchasing power and improve their nutrition.In 1977, at the CGIAR’s request, the Board recognized global responsibilities going beyond
the initially emphasized regional scope.  
CIAT has undergone many changes over the years in accordance with changing conditions
and needs in its sphere of responsibility and with the expansion and specialization of the
CGIAR network of research centers. By the late 1970s the Center was moving from a broad
initial base to a smaller number of research programs with narrower geographical and
ecological foci. Its earlier research on livestock was phased out and the research programs
were built around three major food staples of the Latin American region: rice, beans, and
cassava. A fourth program, replacing the previous Beef Program, was structured in the early
1980s for research on forage pastures in the acid soils of the Latin American lowland tropics.  
During the 1980s CIAT expanded its collaborative networks for testing and adoption of
technologies and focused more attention on managing natural resources. At the beginning of
the decade, CIAT expanded its research on commodities outside Latin America for beans,
cassava and tropical forages for which it had received a global mandate. The regional
program for cassava in Asia started in the late 1970s and one for beans in Africa began in the
mid 1980s. For rice, CIAT had a specific regional mandate and the focus was broadened to
include upland environments, in addition to irrigated rice. The maize research program of
CIAT was transferred to CIMMYT. CIAT increased ties with national agricultural research
programs to devolve and decentralize a share of its operations. Regional programs were built
with staff posted to key regions, and regional networks developed. Also, several specialized
units were established to support the commodity teams. Farmer Participatory Research began
as a project towards the end of the 1980s and a Biotechnology Unit was established.
By the beginning of the 1990s the Center was positioned to conduct research from strategic to
applied research. The requirement for sustainability was further emphasized as reflected in
the environmental sensitivity in the research themes, such as biological control, reduction of
soil erosion and water stress and increased emphasis on the management of natural
resources. Serious financial constraints however forced the Center to downsize its operations
and reduce the number of staff considerably during the 1990s; but the areas of biotechnology,
genetic resources, and participatory research were largely protected. Notwithstanding, the
Center went ahead with significant organizational changes. A new mandate and a new
program structure were devised. Resource allocation for the four germplasm improvement
programs and for training was reduced and a new set of ecoregional activities started. New
Natural Resources Management programs were initiated on tropical lowlands and on
hillsides, as well as studies on policy effects on land use systems. CIAT also became involved
in CGIAR Systemwide initiatives. CIAT modified its organizational structure in 1996,
building up its senior management team around the elements considered essential in its new
strategy of: “improving productivity, managing natural resources and doing research
together.” From the previous research structure based on programs and units, CIAT changed
into a structure of 16 Projects, which included 2 in Saving Biodiversity (including
Biotechnology), 5 in Germplasm Improvement, 5 in Sustainable Production, 3 in
strengthening NARS and, 1 in Policy.  
After the 5th EPMR (2000) and under a new administration (the current CIAT DG began in
2000) CIAT was reorganized based on a new Strategic Plan (2001‐2010) and has subsequently
undergone several reorganizations. During the past few years the Center suffered reductionsin its core funding that led to several cuts in staff and downsizing of programs. In fact, over
the whole period 2001 – 2007, the following research program units were eliminated: Soil
Water Nutrient Management Systemwide, LAC Ecoregional, Sustainable Systems,
Hillsides/Watersheds, and Information for Rural Communities. At the end of 2006, research
was organized under 3 major Research for Development Challenges (RDCs): Agrobiodiversity,
Agroecosystems and Rural Innovation encompassing 11 projects. Under continuous financial
pressure and following the recommendations of CCERs, the Rural Innovation Institute was
closed in early 2007.  
In May 2006 CIAT adopted the concept of “product lines” (PLs), and in May 2007 6 product
lines were formed within the 2 RDCs. The PLs are: (PA1) Market, Institutions and Livelihoods
and (PA2) Integrated Soil Fertility Management, under the Agroecosystems RDC; and (SBA1)
Improved Bean for the developing World, (SB2) Improved Cassava for the Developing World,
(SBA3) Improved Multipurpose Forages for the Developing World, and (SBA4) Improved
Rice for LAC under the Agrobiodiversity RDC. The transition to this new structure is
ongoing.
Research leaders have been appointed for each of the two RDCs as well as for the six PLs.
These PLs are intended to be the heart of the research program and are complemented by
CIAT’s role as convenor of one systemwide program, Participatory Research and Gender
Analysis (PRGA) and co‐convenor of one Challenge Program, Harvest Plus. The introduction
of the product concept is intended to better focus and integrate major elements of CIAT’s
existing research agenda initially within the framework of the Strategic Plan 2001‐2010,
without developing a radically different research agenda, but CIAT recognizes that it is
timely in the second half of 2007 to embark on a reconsideration of its Strategic Plan.
In addition to the organizational changes induced by the product concept, due to constraints
in unrestricted resources and the need to stabilize and rebuild reserves, 10 internationally
recruited staff (IRS) positions (all scientific) and 65 nationally recruited staff (NRS) positions
(40 of which were scientific) were eliminated in 2007. This follows on a round of cuts in 2006
which had phased out 14 IRS and 42 NRS scientific positions (and 83 positions total). Taking
into account the normal attrition from winding up of restricted projects, overall the total
number of IRS has fallen from 108 in 2005 to 86 in 2007 and it’s projected at 81 for 2008. The
latest organizational structure of CIAT, showing the two RDCs and their product lines is
shown in Figure 1.1.
1.3 CIAT’s mission, vision, and goals  
CIAT’s standing operational mandate is: “CIAT will contribute to technology development that
will lead to long‐term improvement in productivity of agricultural resources; to the development of
innovative, more cost‐effective agricultural research approaches and methods; to the strengthening of
agricultural research institutions in participating countries; and to the development of
interinstitutional linkages.” Within the CGIAR, CIAT has global mandates for research on
beans, cassava and forages and for research on rice with a regional responsibility for LAC. In
addition it has important related research activities in: (i) resource management research in
tropical areas through land use agroecosystems‐oriented research in cleared forest margins,
hillsides and savannahs, and (ii) institutional development through support activities at
national and regional levels