nancial highlights
2017 marked a significant milestone for CIAT as the Center celebrated its 50th anniversary. Special events were held in Hanoi, Nairobi, Managua, and Cali to commemorate five decades of collaborative agricultural research for development, together with our numerous partners and donors around the world.

Colombia, CIAT’s primary host country, made noteworthy contributions to the Center. President Santos attended the celebrations in Cali and reiterated Colombia’s commitment to support CIAT’s new genetic resources center Future Seeds with a disbursement of 10 billion pesos, equivalent to approximately US$3 million. Colombian foundation Mario Santo Domingo committed US$500,000 to Future Seeds too, trailblazing for a budding philanthropic sector in the country.

President Santos also awarded CIAT with the National Order for Merit in the degree of Silver Cross, the highest recognition an international organization can receive in Colombia.

An updated assessment of CIAT’s collaborative impact revealed that the total economic benefits generated mostly by the adoption of improved crop varieties stood at a remarkable US$40 billion over 50 years. To help guide both its strategic programming and investment, CIAT is committed to providing more evidence of its impact in other areas, namely natural resource management, food systems, and policy incidence.

In December, HarvestPlus was awarded a US$15-million grant from the MacArthur Foundation’s 100&Change challenge for its work on one of the world’s greatest problems: hidden hunger. HarvestPlus will use the grant to scale up its operations and the delivery of biofortified seeds, ensuring that more communities will forever have access to crops that are more nutritious, resilient, and high yielding.

CIAT’s total revenues in 2017 reached US$84.5 million against US$94.5 million in 2016, a reduction equivalent to 11% explained by a decrease of 27% in Windows 1 & 2 (CGIAR) and 8% in Window 3 funding, and an increase of 15% in bilateral funding.

Despite the total revenue decrease, the daily rate of expenditure (burn rate) remains almost at the same level as of the end of 2016 (193 in 2017 vs 192 in 2016). This is in part explained by the fact that the CGIAR collaboration costs, which are excluded from the computation of the daily cost, suffered the largest reduction, 40% compared to 2016. In terms of adequacy of reserves, CIAT ended the year with 123 days of reserves which represents a loss of 9 days compared to 2016 but remains above the CGIAR recommended minimum of 75–90 days.

As CGIAR funding via Windows 1 and 2 remains uncertain, CIAT has successfully been seeking alternative sources through bilateral agreements. CIAT has strong organizational, scientific, and financial foundations upon which to pursue new research directions and partnerships over the next decade.

Building on fifty years of experience, CIAT will remain committed to producing independent scientific research that policy makers and farmers can use to boost the productivity, competitiveness, and sustainability of farming. In short, the Center will continue to demonstrate the enormous potential of its science in helping achieve a sustainable food future for all.

