Agriculture, the key to lasting peace in Colombia
The armed conflict in Colombia has given rise to 6.9 million internally displaced people, 87% of whom come from the countryside. The municipal areas most affected have seen 3 million hectares of forest destroyed and account for 87% of the illicit crops grown in the country.

Many of the results from the Third National Agricultural Census 2014 underline the difficult predicament of rural Colombia. Particularly noteworthy is the difference in quality of life between urban and rural areas. In this regard, the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) indicates that of 2.7 million agricultural producers in the countryside, 44.7 % live in poverty, with small- and medium-sized growers most affected.

Of the total land area used for agriculture in Colombia, 80.4% is sown to pastures and 19.1% to various other crops. Since the last census, agricultural land has expanded from 5.5 million hectares to 7.1 million – an increase of 29%. Of this total, 74.8% is sown to permanent crops, covering 5.3 million hectares, followed by annual crops, accounting for 16%, or 1.2 million hectares.

Once Colombia achieves lasting peace, its annual economic growth rate is expected to rise by 1.1 to 1.9%, primarily as a result of a boost in confidence about the country´s future. Faster growth will generate between 120,000 and 200,000 new jobs over 10 years. This projection is based on employment elasticity, which in Colombia is 0.7 %, meaning that for every percentage point increase in gross domestic product (GDP), employment expands by 0.7%.

50 years of applied research dedicated to making rural Colombia more productive, inclusive, and sustainable
On 23 June 2016, the Colombian government and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) agreed to a bilateral ceasefire, thus bringing to an end more than 50 years of armed conflict and taking a tremendously significant step toward a definitive peace agreement. Despite its initial rejection in a referendum held during early October, the final agreement was signed on 24 November.

The post-conflict scenario offers a unique opportunity for CIAT to support its partners in Colombia by providing objective technical advice through various strategic approaches. These include conducting applied research for rural development; strengthening the capacity of diverse actors in rural areas; carrying out pilot projects in high-priority zones, such as the departments of Cauca, Nariño, and Caquetá; and guiding processes of territorial development, while helping to integrate new initiatives with ongoing work (such as the peace laboratories and national programs for development and peace), and to start rapid-response post-conflict efforts in affected territories.

ciat-colombiaCIAT has the expertise needed to support new work on key tasks, such as landscape restoration and the development of sustainable food systems; strengthening smallholder farmers associations, using the LINK methodology and participatory methods; providing extension services for rural innovation to boost agricultural production, reduce food imports, and strengthen food security; and promoting a more inclusive, eco-efficient, and competitive agriculture.

The Center also has the capacity to mount initiatives using other high-potential approaches, such as income generation through production alliances, promotion of sustainable food systems in post-conflict zones, and Climate-Smart Villages, which offer means of making Colombia´s agricultural production more resilient.

For reinforcing food security, the best options include biofortified (nutritionally enhanced) varieties of common bean together with community-based seed systems; institutional strengthening, especially among private and public sector actors in the coffee value chain; land use planning supported with a novel approach for understanding the complex dynamics between conservation of tropical forests and armed conflict.

The idea then is to put 50 years of research at the service of the country that has not only served as CIAT´s host from its beginnings but also provided the Center with a strong platform from which to project its work to the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean. The time has come to build peace, taking advantage of CIAT´s reliable scientific experience in strengthening the capacity of smallholder farmers to adapt to climate change and variability; forming alliances to create sustainable value chains based on inclusive business models; designing production systems collaboratively that are environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable; and using Big Data as a tool for closing yield gaps and fostering innovation to modernize the national system of technical assistance in agriculture.

This new agenda for joint work could include steps like those described below, which offer tangible support of rapid-response efforts during initial preparations for post-conflict recovery:

Biofortified varieties of common bean with drought tolerance and improved yields, which offer an effective way to improve public health, while raising incomes and enhancing food and nutrition security.
Establishment of climate roundtables in key regions and Climate-Smart Villages as means of preparing agriculture for climate change and variability.
Application of Big Data with information and communication technologies (ICTs) to close yield gaps, while supporting systems for innovation and technical assistance, which are needed to facilitate adaptation to climate variability.
Strengthening and development of value chains to diversify income, improve access to specialty markets, and foster rural development without deforestation – based on crops such as quinua, cocoa, rubber, and coffee – by building local capacity and participatory alliances.
Support for the development of public policies that encourage conservation of forest carbon.
Identification of areas for restoration of degraded land, using multipurpose forages as well as agroforestry and silvopastoral systems at both the farm and landscape scales, with the aim of contributing to climate change adaptation and mitigation in small- and medium-scale production systems.
Improved efficiency in the production of crops such as rice, reducing both its water and carbon footprint, while lowering production costs (for water and agrochemicals) without affecting productivity. Use of techniques such as rainwater harvesting as productive and sustainable alternatives for adapting to drought, while diversifying production and raising incomes.
Agencies in HQ