Increasingly CIAT has sought to apply its expertise also to specific production problems
encountered with other than the mandate crops, for the private sector, farmer organizations
and others, who often contribute to the research costs. CIAT deploys specific scientific
expertise such as integrated pest management (IPM), soils, biotechnology, and germplasm
conservation to address problems of high value crops, such as tropical fruits, to complement
the efforts of NARS.
Mission
CIAT’s mission statement has not been changed since 1999, when it was last approved by the
Board. It reads: “To reduce hunger and poverty in the tropics through collaborative research that
improves agricultural productivity and natural resources management.” CIAT attempts to integrate
scientific agronomic and natural resources research with social science research, using
extensively a participatory approach. In conducting its work, CIAT stresses collaboration with
many other partner institutions that share similar objectives and concerns, including local,
national and international agencies, both public and private. This feature of CIAT’s operation
has become stronger since the 1990s in accordance with the expanding globalization of the
world and the larger activity of the center in Africa and Asia. CIAT plays a key role in a
network of institutions supporting agricultural research and development, including those of
the CGIAR system, with a view to improve the life of poor farmers in the tropics.
Although CIAT’s mission is ambitious, the Center can expect to have an impact over time
globally but particularly in the tropical region selected for assistance to poor farm families.
Results achieved in the past years outlined later in this report, demonstrate that the stated
mission is a reasonable one for the Center.Vision and strategy
CIAT’s Strategic Plan for 2001 – 2010 was prepared in 2000 after completion of the 5th EPMR
and at the inception of the term of the new Director General. It was intended to reflect a
renovated vision of how CIAT intended to carry out its research for development activities in
order to meet the goals implicit in its mission. The summary (see box ‐CIAT’s Strategic Plan
2001‐2010) extract of the plan reveals the Center’s vision as of 2000.CIAT’s Strategic Plan (2001‐2010), takes stock of emerging trends, seeks to exploit scientific advances, and
envisions a future of sustainable rural livelihoods. In support of this vision, the plan outlines new directions and
organizational arrangements for research, including the partnerships needed and the global and regional
dimensions of future work. Specific consideration is given to the implications of globalization for the rural poor
people in developing countries, both favorable and unfavorable; to the environmental damage caused by
agricultural production and its consequence for resources poor farmers: and to the need for multidimensional,
multipartner approaches extending beyond scientific research to tackle successfully the emerging problems.  
The strategic plan reaffirms the Center’s basic commitment to alleviating hunger and poverty while protecting
natural resources. The notion of sustainable rural livelihoods is at the core of CIAT’s vision for the future. CIAT
recognizes that science‐driven agriculture can contribute to achieving sustainable rural livelihoods by enhancing
competitive agriculture, agroecosystem health, and social capital for collective rural innovation. CIAT remains
committed to fostering these conditions through its genetic improvement, natural resources, ecosystems
management and socioeconomic research.
CIAT’s experience and assets. CIAT’s past contributions to rural development in tropical Latin America,
Africa, and Asia have been significant and varied. They have emerged from research in areas such as genetic
enhancement of crops and forages, pest and disease control, soil management, participatory research methods, and
rural agroenterprise development. The Center’s core asset is a multidisciplinary team of researchers experienced in
systems approaches to a range of biophysical and socioeconomic issues affecting agriculture and natural resource
management. Supporting them is an extensive scientific knowledge base, a large germplasm collection, and an up‐
to‐date infrastructure of laboratories and other research‐support facilities. There is also a long and rich experience
of collaborative work with farmers and other agricultural specialists. This mix of assets gives CIAT a special
advantage in exploiting science for sustainable rural livelihoods in poor tropical countries.
CIAT’s 5 core competencies are: Agrobiodiversity and genetics, Ecology and management of pests and diseases,
Soil ecology and improvement, Land management, and Socioeconomic analysis. Each area of competence brings
together related disciplines that have significant scope to contribute to and benefit from scientific advancement.
Each can help CIAT and its partners to achieve a direct and lasting impact on rural livelihoods in the tropics.
These core competencies are highly complementary, allowing for integrated approaches to problem solving.  
Global and regional strategies. The strategic plan sets out the broad vision for the future that CIAT has
implemented through medium‐term 3 year plans. The following policies and principles have guided the agenda
setting and implementation of the plan:  
(i) CIAT’s research program fits into a global context, namely the work of the CGIAR centers. Some CIAT
outputs, such as conserved agrobiodiversity, are essentially global public goods. Work in this and other areas,
however, is harmonized with regional research agendas in Latin America, Africa and Asia.  
(ii) Key areas of CIAT’s work have a global reach and contribute to sustainable rural livelihoods in all three
target regions of the world. Main research topics are genetics improvement and conservation of beans,
cassava and tropical forages, participatory research methods, agroenterprise development, and management of
natural resources.
Organizing research. The 10‐year plan outlined rests on three guiding organizational principles: integrating
global and regional research strategies; cultivating a mutually reinforcing set of core scientific competencies
within CIAT; and mobilizing project‐based multidisciplinary teams to solve problems and exploit opportunities.Program changes 2002 – 2007
Since 2002, CIAT has undergone a great number of changes in its research and development
activities, reflected in successive program and management reorganizations. Until 2005,
changes were largely of an evolutionary nature, but subsequently these were more radical
and structural in response to financial crisis. The chronology and nature of these changes is
shown and discussed in Chapter 2. Some major modifications include the incorporation of the
Tropical Soils Biology and Fertility Institute (TSBF) based in Africa and related adjustments in
the soils and natural resources areas; launching a tropical fruit project that emphasized a new
research orientation toward high value products to increase incomes in poor rural
communities; reducing the function of strengthening NARS; redimensioning, reformulating
and/or merging several projects such as those on land and water resources, social science,
impact assessment, ecosystems management and termination of certain activities. Such
changes were accompanied by successive rearrangements of program organization and
management, up to the most recent one that adopts the product line concept, which is
intended to better focus and integrate the major elements of CIAT’s research.
The upshot of this process of ongoing change and adjustment over the last five years is that
the vision of the Center has also been modified, at least in terms of the relative priorities and
emphasis contained in the Strategic Plan 2001‐2010. As that original vision was very broadly
stated, however, CIAT continues to operate within the same general framework. The Panel
considers that this situation has resulted in a diffused focus and lack of integration in CIAT’s
program, as pointed out in the previous EPMR and the recent CCERs. CIAT’s proposed move
to product‐lines as an organizing principle is an attempt to correct this problem.
While the general mode of CIAT’s research and development work remain within the broad
guidelines of the Strategic Plan 2001‐2010, developments since 2000 have prompted the
Center to restate its vision and strategic direction. The new statement, drafted in 2007,
attempts to provide a more precise view of how the center sees its work in the years ahead.
Although such a view does not affect the period under review by the EPMR, it indeed gives
an enlightening perspective that helps to better understand the problems, events and progress
that has occurred since 2001, and illustrates the changes in strategy adopted by CIAT as a
consequence. 
