CIAT has a very broad mission and mandate, and a loose, generic strategic plan. In the
absence of strong research management and direction, the center’s research for development
program tends to become too variable and unstable, especially when unexpected difficulties
in exogenous financial conditions arise, as has happened since 2003.  
CIAT therefore currently shows a research program and management organization in a state
of flux. There are no clear cut goals, ways and strategies spelled out for moving the center into
a new path of sound and steady service performance. What is making this difficult is the
extremely low reserves, which have been depleted by the recent cost cutting measures. This
has dramatically reduced management flexibility to act and invest in a new plan. CIAT has
been aware of this undesirable situation and has laid out as of May 2007, a draft proposal of a
renovated vision and strategic direction. The Panel believes that it is very important that
CIAT carry on in the very near future, a process of rethinking, analysis and preparation of a
new strategic plan and a business plan to implement it, in order to overcome the present state
of flux. The global environment in which CIAT operates has been changing rapidly. Large donor
unrestricted financial support of research for development activities in CGIAR centers is
increasingly less secure. The expectations of agencies prepared to invest in special project
activities emphasize the need for measurable development outcomes. The environment has
completed the shift from philanthropic donors supporting science to alleviate global hunger to
one of development focused investors targeting poverty alleviation. While CIAT is well
positioned with core competencies and capacity to operate effectively in this more demand‐
driven environment, it places a new set of pressures on the strategic focus and management
of the center.  
For the period covered by this EPMR, CIAT’s current strategic plan for 2001‐10, as outlined in
Chapter 1, sets out a broadly‐based agenda around the notion of sustainable rural livelihoods
and CIAT’s potential to mobilize its scientific competencies to this end. However, the CIAT
research targets are technology focused rather than informed by detailed analysis of systems
issues or problems. There is a weak connection between the technologies and the livelihoods
goals. Hence, there is no overarching guide for strategic targeting or focus of CIAT’s research
for development agenda. The supply of research competencies and global reach combined
with well‐intentioned but vague references to linkages to improving livelihoods of the rural
poor is not a compelling platform for encouraging investment in the new global environment.  
