Governance
The Panel believes that the Board did not provide strong strategic leadership and oversight
for much of the period since the last EPMR. The growth of project‐funded activity at CIAT,
from 2000 through 2005, was not strategically driven and weakened CIAT’s research focus;
the downsizing that followed was conducted in successive rounds and overall has not
resulted in a clear strategic repositioning. While CIAT’s Board has scientific expertise, it has
lacked financial expertise for the bulk of the period under review. As a result, the Board was
unable to identify and deal effectively with the financial and risk management issues that
CIAT faced – and the center entered a period of financial turmoil.
The current Board has inherited problems that pre‐date the terms of its current members. The
Board has begun to take positive corrective measures. Since late 2005, the Board has been
operating in an intervening mode, in which it has become intensely involved in discussions of
critical issues and decision‐making. During this time, the Board has provided oversight and
guidance to management relating to the financial crisis, and the Board has aimed to ensure
that financial decisions were aligned with research strategy. In the Panel’s view, the Board’s
5
dedication to CIAT and commitment to shepherd the center through this difficult period have
been exemplary.  
However, a Board intervention is not “business as usual,” and as of mid‐July 2007 there is
uncertainty concerning the duration of this intervention. Further, while scientific programs at
CIAT continue to be impressive, financial and management challenges continue to loom
large. In the Panel’s view, the intervention has not resulted in the resolution of CIAT’s
underlying problems. Since March 2006, the center has not had a permanent Director of
Finance or the equivalent – which is essential in the view of the Panel – and no plans are
underway to recruit one (as of mid‐July, 2007). As noted above, the defection of key scientists
has become a major risk at CIAT. The Panel has concluded that fresh approaches are needed
in terms of leadership and governance at CIAT, and that the Board should end its
intervention as soon as possible – so that normality can return to CIAT. [Rec. #17]
The Panel believes that there is a strong chance of financial recovery provided the Board and
management take deliberate and timely actions in the near to medium term. This will only be
possible if the Board and management have a clear understanding of the underlying causes of
the current problem and take appropriate actions, including major adjustments to roles and
responsibilities for financial management, risk management and internal control throughout
the institute. The Board will need to strengthen further its expertise in finance/accountancy
and the operations of its Audit Committee. The Panel recommends that the Board institute
measures in general to strengthen its operations and strategic focus. [Rec. #16 and #18]
It is the Panel’s considered view that the Board has fallen short of good governance practice
in two of its critical responsibilities. First, the Board’s oversight of the performance of top
management was not sufficient to identify weaknesses early and take decisive, appropriate
and timely actions to resolve these in the long‐term interests of CIAT. Second, the Board’s
membership did not include financial expertise that could have helped it spot early signs of
financial difficulties and unconventional accounting practices. In this regard, the Board was
not provided with clear and explicit advice from internal or external professional advisors.
The Panel strongly recommends that the Board reflect critically on lessons learned from the
recent period of distress and move expeditiously, in consultation with the CGIAR, to
reinvigorate the leadership of the Board and its committees, as needed. [Rec. #19]CIAT management initiate as a matter of urgency a strategic planning process that re‐
invigorates the mission of the institute, analyses the environment in which it operates,
enumerates its comparative advantages and strengths, and identifies the major problem
areas and target agroecosystems to focus its research for development agenda on
achievable outcomes.
2. CIAT implement its research for development agenda via a small number of outcome
lines that engage multidisciplinary teams in a system‐based approach that targets
outcomes defined clearly and unambiguously in a revised center strategic plan.
6
3. CIAT support at least one entomologist, one pathologist, one plant physiologist, and one
virologist to provide disciplinary support across the Agrobiodiversity RDC.
4. CIAT strengthen its forage research efforts to better realize the potential of the forage
improvement program for providing benefits to small farmers in Africa and Central
America.
5. CIAT continue to support the rice program in LAC.
6. (i) CIAT revisit its contracts with the Fund for Irrigated Rice in LAC (FLAR), on
access to rice germplasm in line with CGIAR’s guidelines and the Standard Material
Transfer Agreement of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources; and (ii)
CIAT revisit the Papalotla contract on distribution of Brachiaria germplasm, in light
of current marketing and distribution conditions to ascertain if this situation is
presently in line with CGIAR guidelines and the Standard Material Transfer
Agreement of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources.  
7. CIAT and IITA develop a common, coordinated cassava research agenda and work
closely to implement their joint agenda in Africa.
8. CIAT commission a task force of key stakeholders to assist the Center in developing a
regional strategy for rebuilding its research programs in LAC.
9. CIAT’s global orientation be operationalized through strengthened Regional Programs
(Africa, Asia, LAC); this requires operational changes at the leadership, staffing and
administrative levels; including moving additional responsibility, authority and resources
to program leaders.
10. CIAT fully implement the Fifth EPMR (2000) recommendation on IP and add
operational capacity to manage IP to its staff and devise an operational plan for
managing IP.
11. The TSBF Scientific Advisory Committee be discontinued.
12. CIAT adopt the research organizational structure and reporting lines presented in Figure
7.11.
13. (strongly) CIAT Board take rapid and bold actions to reconstitute CIAT leadership and
management in the short term. The Panel also recommends that a specific action‐plan be
put in place to follow up on the implementation of this recommendation by 1 March 2008
in close consultation with the CGIAR.
14. (i) CIAT establish a Finance Director position and recruit an experienced financial
manager with an internationally recognized professional accountancy qualification. The
Finance Director should report directly to the DG to ensure the relative independence of
the position and to enhance internal financial controls, and should be a member of the
Management Team. (ii) The recently established Grants Management Unit should be
abolished and its functions disaggregated.
15. Human resource management become a priority at CIAT; this should entail aligning
human resource planning with broader program and financial planning efforts,
streamlining human resource business processes to improve service delivery, and
renewing policies and their consistent application.
16. The Board, in consultation with management, institute measures to strengthen Board
operations and strategic focus; measures should address information shortcomings, the
Board’s heavy workload and agenda, and priority performance indicators.
17. (strongly) The Board lay out clear parameters and a timetable to end, as soon as possible,
its intervening mode so that normality can return to CIAT.. (strongly) CIAT strengthen the Board’s expertise in finance/accountancy, establish an
internal control policy framework, hold closed sessions of the Audit Committee to probe
deeper on the functioning of internal controls, and make risk management a standing
agenda item of the Board.
19. (strongly) The Board reflect critically on lessons learned from the recent period of distress
and move expeditiously, in consultation with the CGIAR, to reinvigorate the leadership of
the Board and its committees, as needed.
