This study determined the profile of agricultural extension workers in the
municipalities of San Jose, Magsaysay, Rizal, and Calintaan (SAMARICA),
Occidental Mindoro; their technology transfer modalities utilized in extending
organic agriculture; problems encountered in the technology transfer; and the
relationship between the profile of the agricultural extension workers and the
technology transfer modalities utilized in organic agriculture. The respondents of
the study were the 42 front line agricultural extension workers in the Local
Government Unit. They were selected using simple random sampling. Mean and
the Pearson Moment Correlation were used in data analysis. Result shows the
agricultural extension workers in SAMARICA Area, Occidental Mindoro have an
average age of 48.76 years, with long extension experience of 18.14 years, and
had earned a college degree related to agriculture. They “always” introduce new
technologies and practices on organic agriculture with the farmers through
individual farm/ home visits, farmers’ groups meetings, and use of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT)). The agriculture extension delivery system in
SAMARICA Area, Occidental Mindoro is facing challenges in implementing organic
agriculture initiatives in the municipal level. Furthermore, agriculture extension
workers’ age is significantly related to the technology transfer modalities utilized in
organic agriculture Agricultural extension is essentially a message delivery system organized to convey the
latest findings of agricultural; research to farmers. Effective communication is therefore,
the prime requirement in extension work (Memon et al, 2014). Agricultural extension plays
a crucial role in boosting agricultural productivity, increasing food security, improving rural
livelihoods, and promoting agriculture as an engine of pro-poor economic growth
(IFPRI,nd). Agricultural extension aims at providing farmers with necessary education,
skills and technical information to enable them to make effective farm management
decisions to enhance their daily practices. Further, it is an effective mechanism and
system or services which directly help farmers to help them (FAO, WFP & IFAD, 2012).
Declaro-Ruedas (2015) reported that the agricultural extension workers in Magsaysay,
Occidental Mindoro introduce new technologies and practices on organic agriculture with
the farmers through “frequent” group meetings, method demonstration, farmer field school, establishment of demo farm, conduct of farm/home visits, and use of information
and communication technologies.
The agricultural extension in the Philippines is governed by RA 7160 known as the Local
Government Code of1991, which decentralized the extension function, from one central
government that would supervise and facilitate agricultural extension and training services
for farmers, fishers and other beneficiaries –extension and training activities were passed
on to the Local Government Units (LGUs). The LGUs inherited the general agriculture
extension. The largest proportion of the country’s agricultural extension force is with the
LGUs which consist of 79 provinces, 84 cities and 1,525 municipalities and more or less
42,000 barangays. In SAMARICA Area, Occidental Mindoro, the agricultural extension is
a public service under the LGU. To understand the scope of the agricultural extension
worker (AEW), it can be noted that there are about 225,763 populations, who primarily
focus on agriculture, fisheries and agriculture related activities, whereas about 60 AEWs
are distributed across these barangays. This shows a small number of AEWs working with
a large number of farmers, and fishers. Thus, more AEWs are needed, and they need to
become more competent to be able to more effectively contribute to performance
improvement of the agri-food sector.
The demand for organic product is increasingly in local and international markets. This
provides not only opportunities but also challenges for the development of this sector. The
government support for organic agriculture heightened in 2010 in the Philippines with the
passing of the RA 10068 or the Organic Agriculture Act of 2010 which stipulates the
development and promotion or organic agriculture in the country. However, the results of
the Organic Agriculture Baseline survey (OABS) in 2012 indicated that organic agriculture
production in the Philippine is minimal (Garcia et al. 2014).
The Organic Agriculture Act of 2010 is a landmark reform initiative for the Philippine’s
agriculture sector, which address the challenges and issues facing the sector including
positively contributing to the over-all growth and development of the country.
With this, the delivery of organic agriculture knowledge and skills to the farmers was
primarily cascaded through the extension workers in the different provinces in the country.
Thus, there is a need to investigate the technology transfer modalities utilized by the
agricultural extension workers in transferring organic agriculture program. The specific
objectives were to:
 describe the profile of the LGU agricultural extension workers in SAMARICA,
Occidental Mindoro;
 identify the technology transfer modalities utilized by the agricultural extension
workers in organic agriculture;
 identify the problems encountered in the technology transfer of organic agriculture;
and
 identify the relationship between the profile of the agricultural extension workers
and the technology transfer modalities utilized in organic agriculture The value of agricultural extension work greatly depends on the availability of extension
professionals who are qualified, motivated, committed and responsive to the everchanging social, economic and political environment (Declaro-Ruedas, 2015). Results
show the agricultural extension workers had an average age of 48.76 years ranging from
23-62 years. This implies that they were within the middle age and are capable of
providing technical assistance in the field.
Moreover, their long work experience as an extension worker with an average of 18.14
years ranging from 2-41 years is believed to equip them with first-hand experience and
understanding of the farmers’ problems and management constraints. The findings
corroborates with the study of Ngaka and Zwane (2017) that majority of extension
practitioners in South Africa had over 20 years of work experience in agricultural
extension and advisory services.Technology Transfer Modalities Utilized by Agricultural Workers in Organic
Agriculture
The use of information and communication technologies (x̅=4.55) was “always” utilized in
extending organic agriculture technology.
The Training & Visit system, which includes farm/ home visits (x̅=4.52), and farmers’
group meetings (x̅=4.52) were “always” employed technology transfer modalities. It
enjoyed the widest geographical coverage and financing, owing to World Bank patronage.
However, this methodology is now losing favour. Two of the main criticisms levelled
against it are that it follows a top-down approach, and that it is not sustainable, collapsing
as soon as external funding runs out.
These results agree with the study of Declaro-Ruedas (2015) that AEWs introduce new
technologies and practices through community leaders, farmer’s association officials and
local leaders by arranging meetings in the farmer leaders’ home. The possible explanation
for the utilization of these extension methods by the majority of the respondents is the
relatively large number of farmers that agents have to serve, which makes the utilization
of individual methods practically impossible.
However, farmer field school (FFS) (x̅=4.55) and formation of coop/FA groups (x̅=3.68)
were frequently” used by the AEWS. The FFS method has demonstrated its usefulness in
integrated pest management (IPM) programs, especially in Southeast Asia, mainly
because it is environmentally friendly. The main strength of the FFS system is its use of
participatory processes for learning and decision-making by farmers, who attend regular
training sessions which are led by a facilitator and held in a farmer's field throughout a
cropping/breeding season. The main strength of the farmer-to-farmer extension method
lies in its use of farmers' indigenous knowledge and the high value that it attaches to their
opinions.
The formation of coop/FA groups (x̅=3.68) is in viable, homogeneous and sustainable
groups is a challenge in itself. Furthermore, the technical knowledge of farmers may not
reflect the latest developments in agricultural technology, and may encourage the
continuation of inappropriate traditional practices. The old problem of weak linkages
between research and extension still persists, and it is unlikely that there will be any real
participation in research agenda formulation on the part of farmers (many of whom are
illiterate).
Mobile phones (x̅=2.42) is “occasionally” used in agriculture, the e-agriculture platform
constantly cover these examples. Mobile phones either use voice, text or photos within the farmer/extensionists interaction. However, there is a need to formulate the right
messages for and with farmers, addressing illiteracy and empowering farmers to use
mobile phones can lead to increased adoption of new technologies and improved
practices.
The conventional and digital broadcasting (radio) was “never” utilized by the AEWS with a
mean of 1.40. Although, radio is a key information source for the most time-sensitive local
news and information topics, AEWS do not have the capability to use it as a modality.
According to Andrango and Bergtold (2015) found out that radio/TV, state department of
agriculture programs, and programs were the least frequently ranked extension teaching The Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act (AFMA) also known as Republic Act
8435, mandates the “provision of training, information and support services by the
government and non-government organizations to the agriculture and fisheries sectors to
improve the technical, business and social capabilities of farmers and fisherfolks.”
However, the Local Government Code failed to provide mechanisms for the central
government or next higher level of LGU to direct assistance or augment services and
facilities assigned to the LGUs.
Generally, the agriculture extension delivery system in SAMARICA Area, Occidental
Mindoro, Philippines is facing “highly serious” (x̅=3.58) challenges in implementing
organic-based initiatives in the municipal level.
The “not serious” problem encountered by the AEWS in transferring organic agriculture is
the lack of extension worker's knowledge on organic agriculture (x̅=1.54). This supports
the findings of Declaro-Ruedas and Venturina (2016) that AEWS’ organic farming
knowledge, environmental, marketing, and cost and benefit aspect were rated “agree.”
Further, they have “positive” attitude towards organic agriculture. 
methods The “highly serious problems” were the funding for agricultural services depended on the
economic class of the LGUs and interests of local officials (x̅=4.57), lack of infrastructure
facilities for OA (x̅=4.53), and coverage of too many target groups by one agent (x̅=4.53).
As per interview with an AEW, “the interest and priorities of each local government official
vary, thus, funding for agricultural services depended on the economic class of the LGUs
and interests of local officials…the agriculture sectors’ priority changes as the poetical
leaders also change.”
The contradiction of mandates and function with other DA attached agencies of the local
agricultural extension systems greatly affects the kind of delivery of service it provides to
the farmers and fisherfolks (x̅=4.54). For instance, the Fisheries Code of 1998 (RA 8550)
empowered the DA through BFAR to develop cost effective, practical and efficient
extension services on a sustained basis to municipal fishers in underdeveloped areas.
This is in contradiction to the Local Government Code which provided that direct
extension delivery services for farmers and fishermen is the responsibility of Local
Government Units. Further, there is also a mismatch of priority programs extended in the
local government; there is an existing program on hybridization, mechanization and BT
corns that is in contrast with the principles of Organic Law.
The lack of encouragement among OA key players in the academe and private sectors is
considered a “highly serious” problem with a mean of 3.64. In the context of the
Agricultural Knowledge and Information Systems (AKIS), the devolved extension seems
isolated and therefore has a very weak linkage with national and international agricultural
research.
The AFMA mandates state universities and colleges (SUCs) to assist in the LGUs
extension system by improving their effectiveness and efficiency through capabilitybuilding and complimentary extension activities, such as technical assistance, training of
LGU extension personnel, improvement of physical facilities, extension cum research and
information support services. While, the private sector contribution is encouraged
especially the participation of farmers and fisher folk cooperatives and associations and
others in the private sector in the training and other complimentary extension services
especially in community organizing, use of participatory approaches, popularization of
training materials, regenerative agricultural technologies, agri-business and management
skills.
The lack of incentives for career advancement (x̅=4.53) is also a “very highly serious”
problem. One of the most common complaints of devolved agricultural extension staff was
the limited opportunities for career growth. From stable and promising position,
agricultural workers have closed priorities of climbing the career ladder since most of the
provincial offices are not connected with the regional and national DA structure. One AEW
who will retire soon said that “I have been serving for 25 years as an Agricultural
Technologist and still without promotion.Relationship between Profile and Technology Transfer Modalities Utilized
Results shows that there were no significant statistical relationships between number of
years spent in formal education and the technology transfer modalities utilized in the
dissemination of organic agriculture (r=0.63). However, age and number of years spent as
extension worker have a significant relationship (r= 0.51). with a computed r of 0.627 and
0.509, respectively and critical r of 0.43.
Further, Andrango and Bergtold (2015) indicate that older extension agents tend to be
more satisfied when using internet and news media to learn information; however, those
agents working on extension and research and in the government sector tend to be less
satisfied when using news media as they learn new information. On the contrary,
extension agents with higher level of education are more likely to be satisfied when using
news media.The agricultural extension workers “always” introduce new technologies and practices on
organic agriculture to the farmers through individual farm/ home visits, farmers’ groups
meetings, and use of information and communication technologies (ICT). It was noted that
radio broadcasting was “never” utilized, although, radio is a key information source for the
most time-sensitive local news and information topics. This may be due to the fact that
AEWS do not have the capability to use it as a modality as well as the lack of facilities in
the municipality. In addition, the “highly serious” challenges in implementing organic
agriculture initiatives in the municipal level were funding dependency of the agricultural
services on the economic class of the LGUs and interests of local officials, lack of
infrastructure facilities for the implementation of the organic agriculture program, and
coverage of too many target groups by one agent.
Thus, there is a need to capacitate the AEWS on the different extension modalities to
reach a wider range of farmers. This will also help in the appropriate delivery and effective
dissemination of information in organic agriculture in the municipal level.

