The Technologies for African Agricultural TransforBiofortification breeding for three important micronutrients for human health, namely, iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), and provitamin A (PVA), has gained momentum in recent years. HarvestPlus, along with its global consortium partners, enhances Fe, Zn, and PVA in staple crops. The strategic and applied research by HarvestPlus is driven by product-based impact pathway that integrates crop breeding, nutrition research, impact assessment, advocacy, and communication to implement country-specific crop delivery plans. Targeted breeding has resulted in 393 biofortified crop varieties by the end of 2020, which have been released or are in testing in 63 countries, potentially benefitting more than 48 million people. Nevertheless, to reach more than a billion people by 2030, future breeding lines that are being distributed by Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) centers and submitted by National Agricultural Research System (NARS) to varietal release committees should be biofortified. It is envisaged that the mainstreaming of biofortification traits will be driven by high-throughput micronutrient phenotyping, genomic selection coupled with speed breeding for accelerating genetic gains. It is noteworthy that targeted breeding gradually leads to mainstreaming, as the latter capitalizes on the progress made in the former. Efficacy studies have revealed the nutritional significance of Fe, Zn, and PVA biofortified varieties over non-biofortified ones. Mainstreaming will ensure the integration of biofortified traits into competitive varieties and hybrids developed by private and public sectors. The mainstreaming strategy has just been initiated in select CGIAR centers, namely, International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), and International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT). This review will present the key successes of targeted breeding and its relevance to the mainstreaming approaches to achieve scaling of biofortification to billions sustainably. © Copyright © 2021 Virk, Andersson, Arcos, Govindaraj and Pfeiffer.
Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is a crucial staple crop, and provides carbohydrate energy to more than half a billion people in the tropics. Cassava mosaic disease (CMD) is the most important disease of cassava in Africa. Since Sri Lanka Cassava Mosaic Virus (SLCMV) was first reported in South East Asia in 2015, establishing sustainable solutions to CMD has become a top priority for the cassava program at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and its partners. In the present study, we screened two populations for CMD resistance: VNM142, 142 clones collected from farms throughout Vietnam, and CIAT102, 102 clones resistant to CMD or mites, which were introduced from CIAT. High broad-sense heritability was observed in all the trials (>0.80). From the population VNM142, eight clones showed high CMD resistance with CMD severity scores less than 2.0. Two resistant clones had the same DNA fingerprinting with the accessions CR63 (PER262 or TAI9) and KM57 (VNM8) in the genebank, respectively. To our knowledge, this is the first report of CMD resistance in the genebank at CIAT. We also used the two populations to validate the CMD markers S12_7926132 and S14_4626854. Both markers explained 51% of the population variance in the segregating population CIAT102, but only 11% in the diverse population VNM142. Thus, we concluded that the two CMD markers could not be used to select for CMD resistance in diverse populations, but could predict the CMD resistance in segregating populations when the susceptible parents do not have resistant marker alleles and the resistance of the CMD2 donors is confirmed.
The objective of this study was to characterise the nutritional potential of leaves and identify a diversity centre with low cyanide and high nutrient content among 178 Latin American cassava genotypes. This field-based collection represents the seven diversity centres, held at The International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT Palmira, Colombia) by the Cassava Program. The cyanide, all-trans-β-carotene and lutein concentrations in cassava leaves ranged from 346 to 7484 ppm dry basis (db), from 174–547 μg g−1 db and 15–181 μg g−1 db, respectively. Cassava leaves also showed significant levels of essential amino acids leucine, lysine, phenylalanine, valine and threonine, and average total protein content of 26.24 g 100 g−1 db. Among seven diversity centres, South American rainforest group showed low cyanide and high carotene content in leaves. In addition, VEN77 and PAN51 genotypes stood out for having low cyanide in leaves and roots and high carotene in leaves. This genetic diversity can be used to select high potential progenitors for breeding purposes.International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) has a long history of collaboration with Japanese institutions to develop improved crop varieties and adopt agricultural technologies with pioneering approaches for farmers’ benefit. Since 1972, Japan has enjoyed a long history of successful cooperation with the CGIAR (formerly the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research) after becoming its 22nd Member to meet global challenges such as climate change affecting agriculture and food systems in diplomacy through Japan’s advanced science and technology. This long-standing collaboration adopts agricultural technologies developed in Japan and promotes agricultural innovation through cutting-edge technologies such as remote sensing for Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) that will provide novel solutions to the agriculture and food sectors in the tropics. Nowadays, it is presumed that this approach to data-driven agriculture realization will help establish a sustainable agroecosystem with increased agricultural productivity and sustainability by adapting or mitigating the effects of climate change and efficient use of natural resources and establishing a sustainable food value chain. This review highlights the research collaborations and new opportunities on advanced breeding technologies and digital innovations towards data-driven agriculture. In conjunction, we present a potential collaborative research between CIAT and Japan, prioritizing the current and future challenges in agriculture and food systems
	The online journal Tropical Grasslands-Forrajes Tropicales (ISSN official abbreviation Trop. Grassl.- Forrajes Trop.) was created in 2012 as a successor to the former journals, Tropical Grasslands, published during 1967‒2010 by the Tropical Grassland Society of Australia Inc., and Pasturas Tropicales, published during 1979‒2007 by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT). Tropical Grasslands was an important vehicle for disseminating the work of authors from all countries on research and development in the assessment, management and utilization of pastures and fodder crops in tropical agriculture, as well as reviews in these topics (Pulsford 2010). During the 44 years of production, 160 issues were produced, 18 of which were proceedings of conferences on tropical pastures (Tropical Grasslands 2010). On the other hand, Pasturas Tropicales, directed at Spanish speakers and focusing initially for Latin American audiences was first published as Pastos Tropicales, being essentially a newsletter. Scientific publication became increasingly important for the journal and from 1986, its 8th volume, the name was changed to Pasturas Tropicales, which was published as an imprint journal until 2007.
Key message: Status of the current outbreak of cassava mosaic disease (CMD) in Southeast Asia was reviewed. Healthy cassava seed production and dissemination systems have been established in Vietnam and Cambodia, along with integrated disease and pest management systems, to combat the outbreak. Abstract: Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is one of the most important edible crops in tropical and subtropical regions. Recently, invasive insect pests and diseases have resulted in serious losses to cassava in Southeast Asia. In this review we discuss the current outbreak of cassava mosaic disease (CMD) caused by the Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus (SLCMV) in Southeast Asia, and summarize similarities between SLCMV and other cassava mosaic begomoviruses. A SATREPS (Science and Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development) project “Development and dissemination of sustainable production systems based on invasive pest management of cassava in Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand”, was launched in 2016, which has been funded by The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and The Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Japan. The objectives of SATREPS were to establish healthy seed production and dissemination systems for cassava in south Vietnam and Cambodia, and to develop management systems for plant diseases and insect pests of cassava. To achieve these goals, model systems of healthy seed production in Vietnam and Cambodia have been developed incorporating CMD-resistant planting materials through international networks with The International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA).
In the version of this Article originally published, in the sentence beginning “Indeed, the exercise yielded...” in the Discussion and in the label “Records after duplicates removed” in Extended Data Fig. 1, the value ‘23,018’ was incorrect; it should have been ‘22,981’. In the sentence beginning “After the full-text screening...” in Box 2, ‘PRIMSA-P’ should have read ‘PRISMA-P’. In addition, in affiliation 5, “Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)” was incorrect; it should have read “International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)”. All versions of the Article have been amended.
Globally, rainfed crop yields are about 50% lower than yields obtained under irrigated conditions. The low productivity of rainfed agricultural systems is the main factor that accentuates hunger, poverty, unemployment, and illegal migration in Central America and other regions in Latin America. Because of rainfall dependence, farmers can cultivate their crops during only one growing season per year, with high vulnerability to periodic droughts and flooding. To face the challenge of a sustainable food supply in the context of increasing food demand, since the mid-2000s, FLAR (Latin American Fund for Irrigated Rice), a public-private alliance of organizations from 17 Latin American countries CFC (Common Fund for Commodities), and CIAT (International Center for Tropical Agriculture) have been investing resources and efforts to sustainably intensify and diversify high-risk rainfed production systems through capturing runoff rainwater in reservoirs to transform those systems into highly profitable irrigated systems. This article summarizes concepts, results, and experiences from pilot farms using water harvesting in Nicaragua and Mexico, where irrigation combined with smart crop management practices allowed small-/medium-scale farmers to increase their yields of rice, maize, beans, and high-value crops by two to four times in comparison with historical yields obtained under rainfed conditions.
On the eve of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the CGIAR, this paper revisits the genesis of the international center model for agricultural research (IARC). This model became fashionable in the 1960s and was arguably the major institutional innovation of the 20th century for foreign assistance to agriculture. While the founding of the first IARCs is universally attributed to the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, we argue that based on new evidence, the creation of the IARCs was a logical conclusion of a process involving many actors that began immediately after World War I. First, we review FAO efforts to build regional and global research networks for the major cereals in the immediate post-WWII period. These networks linked closely to USDA and its legacy of scientific collaboration across US states that together with the Foundations, strongly influenced the design of the first two international centers for the major cereals. In Latin America, the various efforts by the US National Academy of Sciences, the US government and the countries of the region resulted in the creation of three centers for tropical agriculture, (only two of which exist today) with a broader research focus on farming systems and natural resources. Finally, we show how the establishment of four IARCs in Africa in different ways drew on a colonial legacy that had moved toward centralization of research across colonial territories since before WWII. All of these efforts over many decades involved a good deal of experimentation in organization, funding and governance to arrive at the standard IARC model that emerged. By the late 1960s, the genesis of another six IARCs was already in place stimulating the creation of the CGIAR to fund and coordinate the IARCs. The review concludes with a brief reflection on the successes and challenges of the IARC model over 50 years, and its relevance today.
Genebanks play an essential role in a world where agricultural biodiversity has been lost from farming habitats, malnutrition persists as global population continues to rise, and farm productivity is vulnerable to climate change. We demonstrate the importance of the genebank of the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) to the development of seven iron-biofortified varieties of climbing bean and the impact of their adoption on farm households in Rwanda. First, we link iron-biofortified varieties of climbing beans directly to the genebank through pedigree analysis and key informant interviews with the breeders who developed them. Second, we apply various econometric models to test the impact of adoption on yield, consumption, and purchase of beans by farming households in Rwanda, building upon previous research on bush beans. We based the analysis on a dataset of nearly 1400 households, collected in 2015 by HarvestPlus. We found that the scope of the genetic diversity housed in the bean collection at CIAT was fundamental to developing successful iron-biofortified beans. We found significant positive effects of climbing varieties on yields; however, we did not find significant effects on the amounts of beans consumed by households or bean purchases. Our results suggest that it is possible to trace the journey of an accession from its introduction in the genebank to its final use by farmers and consumers. Positive effects on yield generate incentives for adoption of iron-biofortified bean varieties, potentially boosting micronutrient consumption. Further research is needed to understand the factors affecting the adoption and impacts of climbing bean varieties.
Introduction. The Colombian Altillanura is going through a process of transformation, marked by the expansion of its agricultural border. In the region, it is being implemented a research agenda that seeks to develop and validate promising technologies for the improvement of productivity and sustainability of agricultural production systems. Economic evaluation plays an important role in prioritizing activities, allocating resources, and guiding agricultural research towards rural development objectives. Objective. The objective of this work was to implement an ex-ante economic evaluation to estimate the results and potential impacts of the new promising L23 rice line improved for the Colombian Altillanura. Materials and methods. The impact was measured on the L23 rice genotype, which was developed as a collaboration between the Colombian Corporation of Agricultural Research (AGROSAVIA) and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), for the Colombian Altillanura. The ex-ante evaluation combined a partial budgets analysis with information from experimental tests and economic surpluses model. Results. The two methodological approaches were consistent and showed that with the adoption of the L23 genotype at least 29.7%, a probability of 17.1 % could be achieved for rice producers in the Altillanura due to the expected increase in crop yield. However, a sensitivity analysis of the assumptions warns that a low potential level of adoption along with non-significant changes in yield would make the research and development of the new genotype economically unfeasible. Conclusion. For the research, development and, introduction of the L23 rice genotype to be profitable, it is required a diffusion process that allows the reproduction of the seed and facilitates the access to producers, so that they can reach higher levels of adoption.
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is an important legume crop worldwide. The International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and its national partners in Africa aim to overcome production constraints of common bean and address the food, nutrition needs and market demands through development of multitrait bean varieties. Breeding is guided by principles of market-driven approaches to develop client-demanded varieties. Germplasm accessions from especially two sister species, P. coccineus and P. acutifolius, have been utilized as sources of resistance to major production constraints and interspecific lines deployed. Elucidation of plant mechanisms governing pest and disease resistance, abiotic stress tolerance and grain nutritional quality guides the selection methods used by the breeders. Molecular markers are used to select for resistance to key diseases and insect pests. Efforts have been made to utilize modern genomic tools to increase scale, efficiency, accuracy and speed of breeding. Through gender-responsive participatory variety selection, market-demanded varieties have been released in several African countries. These new bean varieties are a key component of sustainable food systems in the tropics.
This article analyzes maize value chain performance in Malawi and Mozambique using data collected from a market study commissioned by the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture. The results show that although smallholder maize productivity is slightly higher in Malawi, a maize value chain analysis indicates that smallholder maize in Mozambique is more competitive. Mozambique has a relatively higher competitive advantage with regard to maize production because of the relatively lower input costs, perhaps due to its proximity to the coast, which invariably reduces input costs relative to its land-locked neighbor, Malawi. However, smallholder maize productivity is low in both countries, when compared to the regional average. The article concludes that interventions aimed at raising smallholder productivity would invariably make smallholder farmers more competitive. It proposes policy implications aimed at raising the productivity and trade competitiveness of maize, as this will ensure the overall productivity of the maize-based smallholder farming system in the two countries.Brachiaria grasses are sown in tropical regions around the world, especially in the Neotropics, to improve livestock production. Waterlogging is a major constraint to the productivity and persistence of Brachiaria grasses during the rainy season. While some Brachiaria cultivars are moderately tolerant to seasonal waterlogging, none of the commercial cultivars combines superior yield potential and nutritional quality with a high level of waterlogging tolerance. The Brachiaria breeding program at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, has been using recurrent selection for the past two decades to combine forage yield with resistance to biotic and abiotic stress factors. The main objective of this study was to test the suitability of normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and image-based phenotyping as non-destructive approaches to identify Brachiaria hybrids tolerant to waterlogging stress under field conditions. Nineteen promising hybrid selections from the breeding program and three commercial checks were evaluated for their tolerance to waterlogging under field conditions. The waterlogging treatment was imposed by applying and maintaining water to 3 cm above soil surface. Plant performance was determined non-destructively using proximal sensing and image-based phenotyping and also destructively via harvesting for comparison. Image analysis of projected green and dead areas, NDVI and shoot biomass were positively correlated (r ≥ 0.8). Our results indicate that image analysis and NDVI can serve as non-destructive screening approaches for the identification of Brachiaria hybrids tolerant to waterlogging stress.Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is the most important grain legume for human consumption, and drought stress affects over 60 % of dry bean production worldwide. Field and rainout shelter studies were conducted at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), Palmira, Colombia to (i) evaluate phenotypic differences in drought resistance in Andean and Mesoamerican gene pools, (ii) identify genotypes of both Andean and Mesoamerican with superior drought resistance, and (iii) identify phenotypic traits that may be useful for breeding to improve drought resistance in common bean. A total of 24 bean genotypes, twelve genotypes belonging to Mesoamerican gene pool and twelve to Andean gene pool were evaluated under field with two levels of water supply (irrigated and rainfed) and managed drought under rainout shelter conditions. Results showed that five Mesoamerican lines SEA 5, SEA 15, SER 22, SER 16, SER 8 and one Andean line SEQ 1003 have superior resistance to drought. The superior performance of these lines under drought stress was associated with better canopy biomass at mid-pod filling that could be related to deeper root system and effective use of water, combined with efficient remobilization of photosynthates from vegetative structures to pod development (pod partitioning index, PPI) and grain filling (pod harvest index, PHI). Pod harvest index could be a useful selection criteria for drought resistance, to improve the efficiency of breeding programs for selecting superior genotypes of common bean.
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is the most important food legume in the diet of poor people in the tropics. Drought causes severe yield loss in this crop. Identification of traits associated with drought resistance contributes to improving the process of generating bean genotypes adapted to these conditions. Field studies were conducted at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), Palmira, Colombia, to determine the relationship between grain yield and different parameters such as effective use of water (EUW), canopy biomass, and dry partitioning indices (pod partitioning index, harvest index, and pod harvest index) in elite lines selected for drought resistance over the past decade. Carbon isotope discrimination (CID) was used for estimation of water use efficiency (WUE). The main objectives were: (i) to identify specific morpho-physiological traits that contribute to improved resistance to drought in lines developed over several cycles of breeding and that could be useful as selection criteria in breeding; and (ii) to identify genotypes with desirable traits that could serve as parents in the corresponding breeding programs. A set of 36 bean genotypes belonging to the Middle American gene pool were evaluated under field conditions with two levels of water supply (irrigated and drought) over two seasons. Eight bean lines (NCB 280, NCB 226, SEN 56, SCR 2, SCR 16, SMC 141, RCB 593, and BFS 67) were identified as resistant to drought stress. Resistance to terminal drought stress was positively associated with EUW combined with increased dry matter partitioned to pod and seed production and negatively associated with days to flowering and days to physiological maturity. Differences in genotypic response were observed between grain CID and grain yield under irrigated and drought stress. Based on phenotypic differences in CID, leaf stomatal conductance, canopy biomass, and grain yield under drought stress, the lines tested were classified into two groups, water savers and water spenders. Pod harvest index could be a useful selection criterion in breeding programs to select for drought resistance in common bean.Whiteflies (Hemiptera, Aleyrodidae) are represented by more than 1,500 herbivorous species around the world. Some of them are notorious pests of cassava (Manihot esculenta), a primary food crop in the tropics. Particularly destructive is a complex of Neotropical cassava whiteflies whose distribution remains restricted to their native range. Despite their importance, neither their distribution, nor that of their associated parasitoids, is well documented. This paper therefore reports observational and specimen-based occurrence records of Neotropical cassava whiteflies and their associated parasitoids and hyperparasitoids. The dataset consists of 1,311 distribution records documented by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) between 1975 and 2012. The specimens are held at CIAT’s Arthropod Reference Collection (CIATARC, Cali, Colombia). Eleven species of whiteflies, 14 species of parasitoids and one species of hyperparasitoids are reported. Approximately 66% of the whitefly records belong to Aleurotrachelus socialis and 16% to Bemisia tuberculata. The parasitoids with most records are Encarsia hispida, Amitus macgowni and E. bellottii for A. socialis; and E. sophia for B. tuberculata. The complete dataset is available in Darwin Core Archive format via the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF).
Rhizoctonia foliar blight, caused by Rhizoctonia solani anastomosis group 1, is an economically important fungal disease found throughout the world. The fungus attacks numerous crops, including cereals, roots and tubers, legumes, and cruciferous, horticultural, and ornamental plants. In tropical America, this invasive and destructive disease also attacks most Brachiaria spp. used as forages in the ranching industry, especially in the production of cattle. Research to solve this constraint has been ongoing at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture and has generated new Brachiaria hybrids with excellent agronomic performance, tolerance to poor soils, and, particularly, high resistance to biotic factors such as Rhizoctonia foliar blight. These hybrids belong to lines obtained from Brachiaria humidicola, B. brizantha, and B. decumbens. To identify resistance among Brachiaria hybrid genotypes, the hybrid clones were evaluated for their variability in resistance, and their disease reaction was also determined and characterized. Results led to the identification of hybrids that not only were highly resistant to the blight but also had excellent agronomic characteristics.In order to identify the principal constraints and trends for common bean production and commercialization and the priorities for future common bean research in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), a priority setting process was developed at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT). The results suggested that the principal research included breeding and selecting for several traits, such as drought tolerance and water use efficiency, improved yields, and consumer acceptance. Additionally, the results of the priority setting process suggested that institutional measures are needed, such as improving formal seed production and distribution channels and the development of national and regional seed policies. On the other hand, the identified principal constraints included diseases, pests, and market constraints. Finally, the identified principal trends were: increase in demand and production, and development of high-yield varieties and improvement in nutritional quality.The genus Mononychellus is represented by 28 herbivorous mites. Some of them are notorious pests of cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz), a primary food crop in the tropics. With the exception of Mononychellus tanajoa (Bondar), their geographic distribution is not widely known. This article therefore reports observational and specimen-based occurrence data of Mononychellus species associated with cassava. The dataset consists of 1,513 distribution records documented by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) between 1975 and 2012. The specimens are held at CIAT's Arthropod Reference Collection (CIATARC). Most of the records are from the genus' native range in South America and were documented between 1980 and 2000. Approximately 61% of the records belong to M. tanajoa, 25% to M. caribbeanae (McGregor), 10% to M. mcgregori (Flechtmann and Baker) and 2% to M. planki (McGregor). The complete dataset is available in Darwin Core Archive format via the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). © A.A. Vásquez-Ordóñez, S. Parsa.In times of scarcity, farmers resort to preserving food through anaerobic fermentation processes, known as silage. Once the silo is opened, the substrate is aerobically stable if it retains its nutritional integrity when opening. This is the result of an acidic environment that restricts the deleterious effects of the action of pathogenic microorganisms, expressed as indicators of stability to aerobic exposure. One of the empirical problems faced by the producer is to solve the question of how to avoid deterioration of the silage once it is opened, for which this research points to the resistance in the period of aerobic exposure (PEA) of a silage of Pennisetum purpureum (PP) with different levels of substitution of Tithonia diversifolia (TD). The study was conducted at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture in Colombia. With a 90-day fermentation silage, a seven-day aerobic stability test was carried out, using a kilogram silage at different proportions (%) of TD/PP: 100/0, 67/33, 33/67 and 0/100 enriched with two Lactobacillus-based additives. The change in dry matter, temperature and pH was measured, finding stability to aerobic exposure. The role of TD is remarkable once the silage enters the PEA due to the buffer capacity that buffers the change in pH once the silo is opened, generating greater aerobic stability.
