Transfer 2
Mexican primary sector needs a repositioning to meet the challenges associated with society's
demands in the new millennium. Understanding the past is paramount to learn from mistakes and adapting more
swiftly to upcoming demands. Objective: This review aimed to describe a historical overview of economic
developmental models and technology transfer strategies to modernize Mexico's primary sector. Additional
information on economic development and technology transfer policies from other Latin American countries
provides a contextual perspective. Results: Mexican economic models as early as the XIX century provide the
importance of technology transfer to the primary sector. However, they did not support scientific research as a
source of innovation. From the 1950s onward, the need for scientific research to generate innovation and
adaptation of new foreign technologies becomes evident in technology transfer schemes. Similar scenarios are
found in several other Latin American countries. Implications: as a reaction to this need for innovation,
Institutes of scientific research and extension were created in a global economic scenario dictated by the
neoliberal economic model. Despite such progress, research and extension institutions have met with continued
pressure from economic and political sources. Therefore, Mexican research and extension institutions need
more financial support and long-term goals for improved outcomes. Conclusions: technology transfer strategies
in Mexico have historically adapted to shifts in economic developmental models. There is a need for investing
in scientific innovation, enhancing such investments with focused long-term goals. All these might meet the
rapidly changing demands posed by the new millennium. Keywords: Mexico; innovation; extension; development models The contribution of agriculture to a country's
development occurs naturally due to its importance
to the overall economic dynamics (Trigo et al.,
2013). For instance, agriculture offers primary
goods, delivers financial resources for the labor
force and production processes, generates country
dividends by exportation, transfers exceeding labor
force at low cost to the industrial sector, and
represents a market for manufactured goods by the
industry (Cruz and Polanco, 2014). Agriculture
further provides food for the ever-growing
population, raising its demand for quality and
quantity. In contrast, the primary sector faces many
challenges: low profitability, near-poverty
conditions for smallholder farmers, and natural
resources deterioration. Finally, the agricultural
industry changed the primary sector landscape,
motivating the acquisition and application of more
advanced technical knowledge and infrastructure
(Rojas, 2015).
The sustainable growth and development of
agricultural practices (production yields and
productivity) are attainable if local governments
deliver well-defined policies for this sector (Cruz
and Polanco, 2014). These policies must
contemplate subsidies, investments in research,
preferential credit, crop insurance, bonding,
infrastructure development, and technology
transfer (Gómez-Oliver, 1994). Several authors
agreed on the fact that technology transfer
processes reside on use of improved agricultural
inputs, up-to-date technology, and innovation
(Gómez-Oliver, 1995; Jover, 1999; MuñozRodríguez et al., 2001; Barradas et al., 2002;
Leeuwis, 2004; Sabater, 2010; Ponce, 2013; Trigo
et al., 2013; Cruz and Polanco, 2014; LarquéSaavedra et al., 2014; CONEVAL, 2015; RendónMedel et al., 2015; Amaro-Rosales and GortariRabiela, 2016a; Solleiro et al., 2017).
As the source of structural changes in society and
the global economy, education has empowered the
business sector since 2000 (Limaylla et al., 2014).
Developed countries' growth remains firmly based
on scientific and technological development, which
straightens economic growth (IICA-GTZ, 2000).
Vast evidence demonstrates that public policies
with access to scientific knowledge and technology
development can improve life well-being in many
ways (Limaylla et al., 2014) and increases the
mean income (Muñoz-Rodríguez et al., 2001).
Appropriate and clear public technology transfer
strategies allow improved agricultural practices by
incorporating innovation at the production level.
These strategies spawn from dynamic effects and
surge to motivate the adoption of valuable
information provided by human labor mobility,
ultimately transmitting tacit knowledge and
training (De Arteche et al., 2013).
Despite the current understanding that scientific
research and innovation provide a solid foundation
for sustained socio-economic growth and
development, this concept has not been adopted
during Mexico's history, and perhaps, in most Latin
American countries. This mistake in economic and
technology transfer policies profoundly affected
Mexico's development over the past two centuries.
Therefore, understanding this mistake is paramount
to support adequate socio-economic and
technology transfer policies. This review aimed to
describe a historical overview of economic
developmental models and technology transfer
strategies to modernize the primary sector in
Mexico while contemplating some information
from other Latin American countries to give a
perspective on the geopolitical scenario at any
given time. Some interrelated concepts need an explanation to
understand the process of technology transfer. New
technology is the end-product of scientific
research. Therefore, “scientific knowledge” is
defined as an ordinate system of structured
information that studies, investigates, and
interprets natural, social, and artificial phenomena.
Tropical and Subtropical Agroecosystems 24 (2021): #114 Rosales-Martínez and Casanova-Pérez., 2021
3
As an activity, the concept of science refers to a
development process, its dynamics, and integration
to the sum of activities with social impact
(Leeuwis, 2004; Ardila, 2010; Gavito et al., 2017).
The definition of technology can be as broad or
narrow as may be wanted (Sabater, 2010). Also, it
is understood as the practical use of scientific
knowledge (González-Sabater, 2011).
Furthermore, technology is conceived as a
collection of tools made by humans, with the intent
to perform a specific role. Technology also has
instrumental practices, such as creating,
fabricating, and using methods and machines,
including all tangible and non-tangible materials in
their social implications derived from the technical
knowledge (Rammert, 2001), considered axis
between the economic process and the social
structure (Jover, 1999; Acevedo-Díaz, 2006;
Ponce, 2013). To Gavito et al. (2017), the
technology applies knowledge to generate new
methods, processes, services, or devices.
Moreover, technological innovation is the
consequence of technology, the materialization of
an idea into a product, equipment, or operative
process (Jover, 1999). As scientists create new
technology, they also create technological
innovations. Technology as an endpoint applies to
distinct equipment development areas, such as
computers, industrial processes, commercial
secrets, goods, exploration of natural resources,
welfare processes, and services.
In the primary sector, technology represents the
continuously evolving social processes, specific to
agricultural activities, integrated by a set of
technologies that allow the development of local
technological capacities necessary to solve actual
problems and meet a demand in the agricultural
landscape (Ponce, 2013; Trigo et al., 2013). Hence,
science and technology are social processes
influenced by the context in which they develop. In
turn, their application demands careful estimation
of their implications and social impacts (Jover,
1999). These complex inter-relationships between
science, technology, and society constitute the
techno-science, a systemic vision that has deployed
traditional views of science (Acevedo-Díaz, 2006).
“Technology transfer” is a service that assists
people with the acquaintance of improved
agricultural methods and techniques. Technology
transfer maintains a strict relationship with
extension practices, a term created in the United
States (Leeuwis, 2004; Ardila, 2010), albeit
mentioned in Holland and Indonesia as
“Voorlichting,” meaning to clear the path ahead
(Leeuwis, 2004). Hence, technology transfer
represents one of the most effective mechanisms
for accessing cutting-edge technologies. It also
propels the interaction of the primary sector
members with several institutions (e.g., scientific
research, teaching and education, agroindustry)
and strengthens agriculture competitiveness
(Solleiro et al., 2017). The impact of technology
transfer is notorious: it increases production yields,
generates more income, improves productivity, and
ultimately leads to higher educational, living, and
social standards (Leeuwis, 2004). The technology
transfer and innovation policies for agriculture in
Mexico relapse on the extension practice,
comprising technical assistance, capacitation, and
technological support (Amaro-Rosales and De
Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b).
Agriculture growth has an essential role in
producing food and other goods, playing a strategic
role in our national, political, and economic
agendas (Trigo et al., 2013). The positive
contribution of agriculture to economic growth
supports its fundamental role in the economy (Cruz
and Polanco, 2014); thus, technology is paramount
for further positive economic input. Furthermore,
the social return of knowledge in the Mexican
primary sector is usually superior to the private
sector profitability. Ultimately, the private sector
becomes subsidized by the government due to the
formation of human resources (public universities)
incorporated by agricultural production systems.
Due to the private sector's lack of incentives for
innovation and technology transfer (Trigo and
Kaimowitz, 1994; Muñoz-Rodríguez et al., 2001)
ultimately, this process (knowledge generation,
knowledge bonding, and technology transfer) is
viewed as a public cost.
In general, technology transfer is considered a
linear process, based on
generation/validation/transfer processes and the
adoption of technologies, including scientists,
extension agents, and agriculture or livestock
producers as actors of such roles. Historically, the
“linear vision” has dominated extension models in
Mexico. Knowledge is generated and validated in
realistic scenarios. “Technology validation” is an
interface that associates the agricultural
investigation system with the regional production
systems, thus linking research with producers'
practices (Galindo, 2004). Dubickisa and GaileSarkane (2015) envisioned three perspectives to
describe the relationship between innovation and
technology transfer: technology transfer may
include innovation; innovation may include
technology transfer; also, innovation and technology transfer may overlap. These
relationships within these processes are also
opportunities for further research (Figure 1).
Innovation requires adequate founding of
technologies, usually derived from two sources: i)
internal; technologies obtained from their research
and development (R&D) Department; and ii)
external, namely collaborations with other
providers that have the technology available or are
willing to collaborate toward developing the
technology on-demand (Sabater, 2010). The
company might be the technology receptor or
provider (IICA-GTZ, 2000).
Once the technology is validated, it can be widely
adopted. The concept of adoption is a mental
process; the individual withholding the information
for the first time reaches the point of accepting or
abandoning the technology, under the influence of
conditioning factors that contain three types of
change: knowledge, attitude, and individual
behavior (Galindo, 2004). The diffusion and
transfer of innovations tend to begin with
predefined innovations, which adoption has been
considered desirable by the investigator in charge
of the technology transfer. The technology
transference and adoption has a sequence that,
according to Lewis, derives from the model by
Rogers (1962). It is constructed to a large degree
with decision-making normative theories.
Rogers (1995) proposed a theory on decision
making, based on fewer regulations that better
reflects the facts in practice; it includes the
following concepts: knowledge, persuasion,
decision, implementation, and confirmation.
Individuals do not adopt technology at the same
time. There is a rate of promptitude, meaning that
some are willing to readily adopt a technology,
while others take longer (Rogers, 1995).
DEVELOPMENT MODELS AND
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN
AGRICULTURE OF LATIN-AMERICA
The primary sector in Mexico and other Latin
American countries has contributed to economic
growth in many ways over the last 100 years. This
sector's importance was initially high and crucial,
while the industrial sector gained momentum and
expanded its relative importance in the overall
economic output. Nonetheless, if industrial
consolidation is efficient enough, it is expected that
the primary sector benefits by increasing incentives
for exports of agricultural goods, sustaining
domestic food supply (Cruz and Polanco, 2014,
Solleiro et al., 2017).
Several years after their independence, three
models ruled the economic development of Mexico
and other Latin American countries (Table 1): i) the
primary-exporting model (PEM); ii) the
importation substitution model (ISM); and iii) the
neoliberal model (NM) (Trigo et al., 1983;
Delgado, 1995; Bejarano, 2002; Leeuwis, 2004;
Acevedo-Díaz, 2006; Buitrago and Ricardo, 2006;
Guillén, 2008; Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013;
Cruz and Polanco, 2014).
According to Trigo and Kaimowitz (1994) and
Solleiro et al. (2017), organizations' installation to
modernize agriculture through technology transfer
in developing Latin American countries occurred
after World War II as part of the ISM (Guillén,
2008; Vázquez, 2017). Initially, the emphasis was
on agricultural modernization. It required limited
or no scientific research, under the premiss of
enough technology availability (generated locally
or abroad) to significantly improve agricultural
productivity; this fact excluded any input from
local universities and research institutions (Trigo et
al., 1983; Trigo and Kaimowitz, 1994; Trigo et al.,
2013; Vázquez, 2017) In the late 1950s, Latin American countries
accepted the need to invest in national research
capacities with the intent to “adapt” certain
technologies from developed countries to local
conditions (Trigo et al., 1983; Trigo and
Kaimowitz, 1994; Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013;
Solleiro et al., 2017). Therefore, Latin American
countries adopted the “Cepalino model,” with the
concept of implementing something similar to the
Marshall plan used to reconstruct European
countries after the Second World War. The
“Cepalino model” was aligned with Latin
American economic policies, such as
industrialization and substitution of importations
based on the increased output of food supply by the
primary sector (Bejarano, 2002; Guillén, 2008;
Ardila, 2010). According to several authors
(Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013; Solleiro et al.,
2017), the technology transfer model that Latin
America adopted contained many references to the
Land-grant College model. The United States
created this model following the “Morril Laws” of
1862 and 1890. Although later also included
financial support from the private sector and
agricultural associations, this system accepted
federal and state funding.
In practice, this process was an essential step
toward progress in economic, scientific, and
technological terms for Latin America. By the end
of the 1950s, most countries created semiautonomous public research institutes; several had
the strategic goal of performing extension and
technology transfer activities. Most of their
population lived in rural areas and relied on smallscale agricultural production for self-consumption.
Thus, with some previous institutions' attempts, the
“Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agrícola
(INTA)” was created in Argentina on December
4th of 1956 (Decree-Law 21.680/56). In 1947, the
federal government in Mexico created the
“Instituto de Investigaciones Agrícolas (IIA),”
renamed in 1961 as the “Instituto Nacional de
Investigaciones Agrícolas.” This Institute,
combined with the “Instituto Nacional de
Investigaciones Pecuarias (INIP)” and the
“Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Forestales
(INIF, launched in 1965), integrated the "Instituto
Nacional de Investigaciones Forestales, Agrícolas
y Pecuarios (INIFAP)” (Cadena-Iñiguez et al.,
2018c; SAGARPA, 2018). Thus, IIA and INTA
were the first agricultural institutes in Latin
America, with the mission to propel research and
agricultural extension, with the ultimate goal of
improving living conditions in rural areas
(Durlach, 2005).After the foundation of INTA, this
institutional model was replicated throughout Latin
America by cooperative efforts between the U. S.
government, private foundations (Ford, Kellog's,
Rockefeller, among others), and the International
Development Agency and funding by the InterAmerican of Development Bank. These institutes
had similar goals when initially created. Some of
these institutions remain active, although public
and sectoral policies have changed drastically.
Another critical influence on institutional
cooperation was the surge of international research
systems. Three research centers were placed in
Latin America: “Centro Internacional de
Mejoramiento de Maíz y Trigo (CIMMYT)” in
Mexico, “Centro de Investigación Agrícola
Tropical (CIAT)” in Colombia, and “Centro
Internacional de la Papa (CIP)” in Peru (Ardila,
2010). Such research centers' development was a
global public policy in the late 1970s led by the
International Service for National Agrícola
Research. This policy represented an important
support to research and extension programs in
Latin America (Oasa and Jennings, 1982; Guillén,
2008; Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013). The first evidence of technology transfer in Mexico
date back to the pre-Hispanic period. However,
during the Mexican revolution between 1911 and
1920, a mission formed by agricultural technicians
traveled around the country to provide technical
assistance (Amaro-Rosales and De GortariRabiela, 2016b). Before the Second World War
and the so-called “green revolution” in the 1950s,
the government recognized the importance of
extension programs for technology transfer in
agriculture (Aguilar-Gallegos et al., 2016). Under
these historical precedents and the ISM, the
government of President Lázaro Cárdenas
promoted new land reforms (Gómez-Oliver, 1995).
These reforms occurred throughout Mexico and
Latin America, a movement influenced by the US
agricultural extension model called “Land Grant
Universities” (Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013;
Solleiro et al., 2017). This model was implemented
in 71 countries, and Mexico began in 1943. The
model centered on promoting research and
extension activities coordinated by federal
governments, which ultimately relied on national
agricultural research institutes to execute
technology transfer (visiting and training model).
Moreover, governments and research institutes
collectively established the priorities to guide
extension programs. The visiting and training
model had three fundamental characteristics:
firstly, it was linear and unidirectional, where
research goals motivated the experiments, with
results shared later with no feedback between
scientists and producers (Aguilar et al., 2016); this
system reinforced a hierarchical structure, where
producers were solely assimilating the information
(Amaro-Rosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b).
The second program characteristic was a reliance
on technology packages for widespread
distribution, mainly exemplified by the diffusion of
improved seeds. These strategies were fundamental
cornerstones for the green revolution development
(Muñoz and Santoyo, 2010). As the third
characteristic of the model, either research and
extension institutions formed an integrated
network that offered both services and technology
transfer. For instance, financial credit was available
by Banrural, Fertimex provided fertilizers, and
Pronase offered seeds. The contracts made all these
companies the primary providers of agricultural
inputs. Furthermore, another requirement to obtain
credits was to contract a crop's insurance from
ANAGSA; also, parastatal companies such as
CONASUPO or INMECAFE commercialized the
production, contracted under a minimum price
policy (Muñoz and Santoyo, 2010).
Based on the growing demand, the results of the
governmental intervention using this agricultural
extension model, led to the creation of public
agricultural research institutes (Table 2), also
supported by international foundations in Mexico
by the late 1960s, thus leading to the creation of the
Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Agrícolas
(INIA) (Muñoz-Rodríguez et al., 2001; Ardila,
2010; Amaro-Rosales and De Gortari-Rabiela,
2016b). In 1985, INIA was fused with the “Instituto
de Investigaciones Pecuarias (INIP)” and the
“Instituto de Investigaciones Forestales (INIF)”,
thus forming the “Instituto Nacional de
Investigaciones Forestales, Agrícolas y Pecuarias
(INIFAP).” This period was also marked by the
creation of additional research programs and
institutions in Mexico, such as the agricultural
research and extension system of Mexico, the
“Colegio de Postgraduados,” and the “Universidad
Autónoma Agraria Antonio Narro” (AmaroRosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016a). The same
happened in other Latin American countries (Table
2). These institutions received intensive criticism
over the years, since research has focused on
questions that do not mirror the challenges faced on
a daily basis by local producers.
During the ISM period (Bejarano, 2002; Buitrago
and Ricardo, 2006; Guillén, 2008), Mexico faced
steady economic growth due to extension and
technology transfer policies in the primary sector.
The Mexican Gross Domestic Product, primarly
dependent on agriculture, grew 7% per year from
1940-1958. Afterward, there was a period of
stabilizing economic growth, albeit the agricultural
industry grew 9% annually and 6% from 1959-
1981 propelled by the developing industrial sector
(Gómez-Oliver, 1995; Cruz and Polanco, 2014).
The agrarian reform performed since Cárdenas'
government was another vital factor that promoted
the development of extension programs and
technology transfer policies. This reform
contemplated land distribution for collective use in
units called “ejidos.” The impact was that the
country reached auto-sufficiency in food
production and supply by the mid-1960s (Cruz and
Polanco, 2014). From president Miguel Alemán's
government onwards, public policies strengthen
agriculture production and industrialization,
associated with the increased use of cutting edge
technologies. The transfer of resources from  agriculture to the whole economic landscape helped
the capitalization of economic units.
In contrast to the expectations, the programs
implemented for economic development in rural
areas became quite elitist as living proof of the
ISM. Support was directed towards the industry
and privileged the production of goods for
consumers in urban areas, thus contributing to
polarization and inequality growth between urban
and rural populations. The majority of smallholder
farmers that did not access financial credit or other
incentives remained as self-consumption producers
or migrated to other regions or urban areas. The
rural emigration in the 1950s was dedicated to the
agricultural industry demands but did not cause
much migration, and most found work near their
homeland. The later demand for the urban industry
required moving to urban areas (Gómez-Oliver,
1995; Calva, 2004; Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013;
Cruz and Polanco, 2014; Solleiro et al., 2017;
Vázquez, 2017).
By the end of the 1970s, the elevated international
credit interest rates (~43% year-1
) provoked a rapid
increase in the external debt (Gómez-Oliver, 1995),
leading to an economic slowdown in Mexico after
decades of steady growth. This period also
contemplates the beginning of the disarticulation
and dismantling of agricultural policies. The first
indications of this trend were the decline in
governmental credit to agriculture, diminished
agricultural subsidies, and lower public investment
in agriculture (Gómez-Oliver, 1995).
The impact of the NM reaches Latin America in the
early 1980s (Table 1). With Miguel de la Madrid as
president, Mexico installed a new economic
developmental model for Latin America, thus
following the Friedman doctrine of free markets
and exportation-oriented economies. Many
economies, including Mexico, abandoned the
primary sector or chose inadequate developmental
policies (Méndez, 1998; Cruz and Polanco, 2014).
For Mexico, the NM's adoption brought parallelism
of the primary sector's stagnation and the low
economic growth that made producers vulnerable
(Delgado, 1995; Calva, 2004). It was characterized
by its anti-rural slant and its anti-interventionism
and by which many rural development policies
diminished.
The destruction of agricultural policies and the
decline of the primary sector resulted from the
Mexican economy's rapid opening, culminating in
the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), signed by the Mexican president Carlos
Salinas de Gortari on December 14th, 1992. Under
NAFTA's context, agricultural goods lost
minimum price references, implying rentability losses in the primary production and producers'
buying power (Calva, 2004; Cruz and Polanco,
2014; Limaylla et al., 2014).
The Mexican economic decline persisted under the
NM. The combination of several factors (uneven
economic competition, patronage, corruption, and
lack of long-term thinking for public policies) and
NM practices made the Mexican economic model
unviable. Previous developmental policies became
extinct or suffered abandonment. ANAGSA closed
in 1990; Fertimex ended on the private sector in
1992; Banrural lost 75% of its structure by 1999,
finally replaced by Financiera Rural in 2003.
Conasupo gradually decreased its role of minimum
price ruling for agricultural goods and stopped
maize and bean acquisitions by 1998 (MuñozRodríguez et al., 2001).
The neoliberalism model promoted new extension
and technology transfer approaches at national and
international levels, albeit demanded reductions in
local governmental research investment and
privatization of selected public services. The
Mexican government canceled programs and
financial support to agricultural extension
programs, thus discontinuing the “Dirección
General de Promoción y Extensión Agrícola” and
holding responsible the INIA and the irrigation
projects called “Distritos de Riego” (AmaroRosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b).
Efforts begin to emerge by 1988 aiming to
revitalize the Mexican agriculture due to the
declining production. The reformulation of the
extension system in early 1990’s was the result of
many factors. They originated from the
government aim to revive the extension and
technology transfer programs supported by the
“Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos”
(renamed as SAGARPA), through the “Dirección
del Sistema de Extensión Agrícola” and research at
INIA (Muñoz-Rodríguez et al., 2001; AmaroRosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b).
In 1995, the “Sistema Nacional de Capacitación y
Extensión Rural Integral (SINDER)” was created
and integrated with the “Programa de Capacitación
y Extensión (PCE)” and the “Programa Elemental
de Asistencia Técnica (PEAT).” These programs
focused on training and technical assistance with
independent professionals hired with input from
producers. An unfavorable outcome of this system
was the surge of biased hiring, establishing
clientelistic structures among organizations,
reducing the extension program impact.
Another governmental strategy led to producers’
participation in defining the priorities in research
programs, aiming to presumed answers to the most
demanding technical problems in Mexican
agricultural settings. This new vision flourished in
1996 by creating the “Programa de Investigación y
Transferencia de Tecnología (PITT)” as part of the
“Alianza para el Campo” program. Farmers’
foundations instrumented this program to ensure
producers' input, integrating representative type
producers under a Civil Association. The
extension and technology transfer programs
integrated research institutions, agricultural
dispatches with federal funds, and state
governments' activities. Approved budget by the
“Consejo Estatal Agropecuario” allocated no more
than 50% of the federal funding for research
projects or technology transfer costs (MuñozRodríguez et al., 2001). This program, backed up
by the PITT, showed some inconsistencies, such as
the separation between technology development
and validation from technology transfer processes
to producers that may benefit from them. The
generated innovations accumulated in the research
centers and did not become available to producers.
In sum, there was no systemic approach to monitor
project development and its outcomes.
A similar program in Mexico was exclusively
devoted to livestock production called the “Grupo
Ganadero de Validación y Transferencia de
Tecnología (GGAVATT)” was financed by the
during the decade of 1990 and the decade of 2000
(Gallardo-López and Rodríguez-Chesani, 2011),
process described by several authors (Barradas et
al., 2002; Eduardo et al., 2002; Ponce, 2013). In
1970, members of the “Instituto Nacional de
Investigaciones Forestales, Agrícolas y Pecuarias
(INIFAP)” formed a group of producers to
replicate the technology transfer system they
developed for several years. An inter-institutional
meeting of the livestock subsector in Veracruz state
in 1990 aimed to display several experiences about
technology transfer in livestock production. During
this meeting, participants agreed to work with the
GGAVATT model described by INIFAP, the
program's foundation. Similarly, this model
established programs in Tabasco and Oaxaca
states. This effort also led to preparing documents
(e.g., manuals) and training activities for
professionals that would establish GGAVATT
throughout the country.
This strategy was pivotal to popularize GGAVATT
and allowed producers (Cattle and small ruminant
keepers, beekeepers) to receive technical assistance
directly on their farms. In turn, GGAVATT professionals received support from research
institutions to intensify the use of new technologies
using validation and technology transfer
agreements. From 1997 onwards, this model gave
rise to the “Programa Nacional de Validación y
Transferencia de Tecnología (PRONAVATT).”
All GGAVATT associated producers in the
country integrated the livestock component of
PRONAVATT. GGAVATT professionals led the
technical assistance component, integrated by the
coordinators and all institutional components
(research institutions, livestock subsectors,
livestock associations, and representations of
veterinarians and animal scientists). Although this
institution has generated important innovations for
the agricultural sector adopted by farmers, it has
not complied the generation of added value to
primary products and the strategies for farmers to
access the various markets, generating higher
income and contributing to innovation
management.
Since 2001, agricultural policies' application
became normalized in the “Ley de Desarrollo Rural
Sustentable.” This law delegated policy
application, research investigation, and extension
to SAGARPA, which coordinated several
institutions responsible for policy execution. The
new extension policy delegated agent training to
the “Sistema Nacional de Capacitación y
Asistencia Técnica Rural Integral (SINACATRI),”
with the main goal to execute and evaluate such
training programs to the national level (AmaroRosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b). These
processes centered agent training programs from
the “Programa de Capacitación y Extensión (PCE)”
and the “Programa Elemental de Asistencia
Técnica (PEAT)” to give rise to the “Programa de
Extensionismo y Servicios Profesionales
(PRESPO).” This scenario included the
SINACATRI, overviewed by both, municipal and
state governments, with training provided by the
“Sistema Nacional de Investigación y
Transferencia Tecnológica para el Desarrollo Rural
Sustentable (SNITT).” This institution coordinated
training efforts for public and private institutional
policies, for research endeavors, technology
development, validation, and technology transfer.
Unfortunately, there was no positive impact of
these strategies due to the lack of true integration
between SINACATRI and the SNITT (AmaroRosales, 2016b).
During the government of Felipe Calderón
Hinojosa in 2007, derived from the National Plan
of Development 2007- 2012 and in agreement with
Article 14 of the “Ley de Desarrollo Rural
Sustentable” (DOF, 2007), the federal government
presented the “Programa Especial Concurrente
para el Desarrollo Rural Sustentable (PEC),”
applied to the “Política de Desarrollo Rural.” In
turn, the “Ley de Desarrollo Rural Sustentable”
aimed to promote efforts with planning and
prospecting, allowing sustainable development
under a long-term vision; the fundamentl premise
that sustainable human development of the rural
inhabitants and adequate management of natural
resources. The PEC operated in an inter-secretarial
manner within 17 dependencies of the federal
executive cabinet.
Ardila (2010) described that under the “Desarrollo
Rural y la Alianza para el Campo and the Dirección
General de Servicios Profesionales para el
Desarrollo Rural, SAGARPA” developed
mechanisms to offer professional services to
underdeveloped rural contexts. These initiatives
gravitated to improve familiar agricultural settings
and to strengthen rural organizations. Under this
decisive government role, “Servicios Profesionales
para el Desarrollo Rural” designed a working
model that established evaluation and certification
systems for companies and technical assistance
firms. Furthermore, it established mechanisms to
supervise and evaluate each agent's technology
transfer performance (Gómez-Oliver, 1995;
Rendón-Medel et al., 2015; Amaro-Rosales,
2016b). This technology transfer setting led to high
governmental subsidies, thus applying outsourcing
for contracting to avoid workforce responsibilities
and reduce fiscal burden (Gómez-Oliver, 1995;
Rodríguez, 2010; Rendón-Medel et al., 2015;
Amaro-Rosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b).
Nonetheless, there are institutions in Mexico that
operate for the past century to provide credit,
guarantees, training, technical assistance, and
technology transfer to the primary sector. These
institutions operate as second-tier banks with their
own heritage and offer their resources through
intermediary financial institutions such as
“Fideicomisos Instituidos en Relación con la
Agricultura (FIRA)” and the “Fideicomiso de
Riesgo Compartido (FIRCO.” Extension programs
in Mexico and Latin America provide this service
as complex public-private endeavors and, to a
lesser extent, by public educational institutions
under structural reforms modeled by the neoliberal
economic system. As mentioned previously, the
known policies (e.g., technology transfer,
extension) result from complex organizational
restructuring. This historical process describes thederived from the consolidation of social and
economic paradigms. These changes would
facilitate the insertion of these countries in the
global economy and to reduce public expenditures
as a potential byproduct of such worldwide
insertion (Gómez-Oliver, 1995; Méndez, 1998;
IICA-GTZ, 2000; Calva, 2004; Ardila, 2010; Trigo
et al., 2013; Rendón-Medel et al., 2015; AmaroRosales and De Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b; Solleiro et
al., 2017).
The presence of PSP was the result of demand from
several institutions, non-profit organizations, and
farmers themselves, with subsidies from public
sources and the intervention of second-tier banks
such as INCA Rural and FIRA. Recent indicators
evidenced that technology transfer through rural
extension did not improve the technological level
for most farmers (Gómez-Oliver, 1995; Méndez,
1998; IICA-GTZ, 2000; De Souza Silva, 2001;
Calva, 2004; Ardila, 2010; Trigo et al., 2013;
Rendón-Medel et al., 2015; Amaro-Rosales and De
Gortari-Rabiela, 2016b; Solleiro et al., 2017).
Several factors explain this scenario, including the
complexity of these public extension services
created in Mexico to contribute to the primary
sector and boost rural development. Public policies
were fruitless, most likely due to the rapid turnover
of employees and extension planning, poor interinstitutional coordination, inefficient spending, and
public solid resource dependency. These facts
imply an intention to prioritize organizational
performance over benefiting producers.
The “Programa Integral de Desarrollo Rural
(PIDER)” coordinated the public policies on
innovation and technology transfer during this last
decade in Mexico. PIDER was created in 2014 in
the structural reform framework by SAGARPA, in
alignment with the PND. The second aim of the
PND, “Achieve a prosperous Mexico,” and the
fourth aim, “Achieve an inclusive Mexico,"
entailed reducing food insecurity. The PND related
directly to the fifth objective of the “Programa
Sectorial de Desarrollo Agropecuario, Pesquero y
Alimentario 2013–2018.” The PND integrated 11
components, a few derived from previous
programs, fomenting agricultural production since
food production declined, leaving uncovered
Mexico's demand . PIDER aimed to contribute to
food insecurity reduction, focusing on extremelypoor populations in impoverished urban regions.
The specific goal was to increment food production
by mediating the acquisition of agricultural inputs,
infrastructure (sustainable soil and water usage),
and equipment. Also, PIDER's aims were: 1. to
carry out comprehensive productive projects for
development; 2. to capacitate and professionalize
rural innovation and extension services; 3. to
strengthen rural organizations; 4. to increase
insurance schemes to attend to any potential loss
caused by natural disasters. This new program
derives from the “Programa Integral de
Capacitación (PIC)” from 2013, as mentioned
above. The PIC was one of the most recent efforts
to reorganize agricultural extension services in
Mexico while retaining previous programs'
characteristics, such as the investment in
innovation (CONEVAL, 2015; Rendón-Medel et
al., 2015;
linear focus as a step of public monopoly in rural
extension that leads to a crisis in the early 1980s, 
of evaluating the effectiveness of an intervention
oriented by technology. These contemplated the
incidence of technology adoption (the broad
margin), following its future use: the intensive
margin. Furthermore, some factors that can
influence technology adoption are educational
level, family income, communication skills,
attitude, and gender (Hay and Pearce, 2014; Shah
et al., 2014). The impact of extension services on
combating poverty and cooperatives' role in
technology adoption is significantly more
substantial for smallholders with access to credit
than those who do not have access (Wossen et al.,
2017).
These facts reinforce the importance of rural
extension services to hold agricultural practices
and economic growth. Nonetheless, these services
depend upon environmental, institutional, political,
and cultural contexts. Furthermore, capacitating
extension technicians in interpersonal abilities and
social sciences is fundamental to reach the
expected outcomes. Three areas in extension work
are important: inter-institutional articulation,
strengthening farmers' organizations, and
providing holistic counseling service; in this sense,
Cadena-Iñiguez et al. (2018b) also recommend
generating a support platform to train, instruct and
accompany, in addition to providing an evaluation
to the extension agents themselves, to guarantee in
the first instance the protection of the plant genetic
resources of family farming. The rural extension
has to go beyond productive and commercial
support, so a good extension agent must be
competent in both agricultural and social sciences
to address the complexity of development
processes. Furthermore, she/he must possess
personal attitudes and abilities to work fruitfully,
bond with people, listen, be sincere, trustworthy,
humble, flexible, and committed to producers,
This position shall be part of the Bean Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC) which is part of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) of TAAT. 
The Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Bean Value Chain Technology Transfer Officer (TTO) has the responsibility of enhancing the capacities of seed and input suppliers and actors to sustainably, 
provide quality seed of improved high Iron bean (HIB) varieties and complementary inputs/technologies to small-scale farmers across the countries implementing TAAT Bean Value Chain Project. He/she will also be required to provide leadership and guidance in bean seed systems and technology transfer in conjunction with Bean Value Chain Coordinator and other 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) staff. We present results of a randomized evaluation that assesses the effects of different incentives for diffusion of agricultural knowledge by smallholders in northern Uganda. Randomly-selected disseminating farmers (DFs) from a large sample of villages are assigned to one of three experimental arms: (a) training about climate smart agriculture, (b) training plus a material reward for knowledge diffusion, and (c) training plus a reputational gain for knowledge diffusion. We find that leveraging somebody’s reputation (or social recognition) has a positive impact on DFs’ experimentation and diffusion effort. This impact is stronger than that measured in the private material rewards treatment.
In 2008, CIAT began exploring a new approach to use
big data tools to analyze information and help farmers
make better on-farm decisions that lead to improved
agricultural outcomes. This approach, referred to as
data-driven agronomy, enhances agronomy through
increased use of observational information, data
mining, and contextual information to provide farmers
with tailored recommendations about what to plant,
when, and how to manage crops. CIAT has been using
the approach over the last ten years with a range of
partners across Latin America. This case study focused
on CIAT’s experiences in Colombia working with the
rice, fruit, and maize growers’ associations – Fedearroz,
Asohofrucol, and Fenalce, respectively – and the
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development in the
region of Pereira.
CIAT’s data-driven agronomy work has three
distinct phases: data collection, data analysis, and
knowledge management 



