Investigadores
To reduce hunger and poverty, and improve human nutrition in the tropics through research aimed at increasing the eco-efficiency of agriculture.
People CIAT’s staff includes about 200 scientists. Supported by a wide array of donors, the Center collaborates with hundreds of partners to conduct high-quality research and translate the results into development impact. A Board of Trustees provides oversight of CIAT’s research and financial management.
Values Shared organizational ethic  We respect each other, our partners, and the people who benefit from our work. We act with honesty, integrity, transparency, and environmental responsibility in all of our joint endeavors.
Learning through partnerships We work efficiently and pragmatically together and with partners. Considering our diversity to be a key asset, we adapt readily to change and strive to improve our performance through continuous learning.
Innovation for impactWe develop innovative solutions to important challenges in tropical agriculture, resulting in major benefits for the people who support, participate in, and profit from our work.
CIAT scientists, using targeted project proposals, have been very successful at attracting
restricted project funding. Figure 2.1 and Table 2.1 show the revenue trend for CIAT over the
period 2000 to 2007. The gradual decline in unrestricted funding has been more than
countered by the significant increase in restricted project funding. Clearly, there is substantial
demand for CIAT’s research competencies.Total revenue in 2007 is estimated at US$45.4M (Table 2.1), an increase in real terms of 22%
over 2000. In spite of this large overall increase in revenue, however, a major shift from
unrestricted core to restricted project funding has occurred. Restricted revenue rose by 121%
from US$13.6M in 2000 to an estimated amount of US$30.0M in 2007. Over the same period,
unrestricted revenue declined by 38% from US$22.3M to US$13.9M.
At first glance these data suggest that CIAT has adapted well to the more demand‐driven
environment. However, this largely reflects the creativity and entrepreneurial capacity of
CIAT scientists to respond rapidly to environmental change. The evolution of the overall
vision, research strategy, program thrusts, and overall governance and management of the
institute has lagged. The gradual shift to a greater proportion of restricted project funding
was not accompanied by appropriate adjustments in financial management systems, leading
to incomplete costing of special projects and a financial “crisis” that has pre‐occupied the
Board and management for the past few years. The Panel of the CCER on Governance,
Management, and Finance encouraged CIAT to move away from governance, management
and financial systems that pre‐suppose a core‐based institution, and recommended that CIAT
redesign its systems to create a coherent and transparent framework appropriate for a
projects‐based institution. At the same time, the success of the scientists in capturing special
project funding had also further diversified the suite of CIAT activities, which were already
suffering from lack of clear strategic focus. Consequently, other recent CCERs noted a similar
lack of vision and research strategy. For example, the first recommendation from the CCER
on Agrobiodiversity states “The Panel recommends that CIAT’s overall mission be sharpened in the
form of several major focus areas addressing products, tools, services, and knowledge. Such a vision
should facilitate the establishment of a global yet concrete project portfolio within CIAT’s mission.”
Clearly CIAT had not yet adjusted to its new environment.  
In this chapter, the evolution of CIAT’s research program and structure since the last EPMR is
first summarized. This demonstrates the difficulty faced by research managers in navigating a
path for the institute as the operating environment changed. It also highlights the constancy
of organizational change faced by CIAT staff during this period of flux. This instability has
created a number of issues and tensions that have become central to the reflections of this
EPMR Panel in its attempt to provide constructive guidance and recommendations for the
future of CIAT. The Board and CIAT management have only recently commenced a re‐

