The Agroecosystems RDC was created in 2006 by merging the previous Rural Innovation
RDC with the Agroecosystem RDC. This brought together the project areas in Crop and
Agroecosystem Health Management (the former PE‐1), Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility
(PE‐2), Rural Agroenterprise Development (SN‐1), Participatory Research Approaches (SN‐3),
Systemwide Program on Participatory Research and Gender Analysis (SW‐3), and Spatial and
Economic Analysis for Decision and Policy Support in Agriculture and the Environment (BP‐
2) as outlined in Chapter 2.
In an attempt to achieve enhanced focus and integration, following recommendations to that
end from the three research CCERs in 2006, CIAT has now discontinued projects and
implements its research program through a product line (PL) approach. However, the PL
approach has been implemented within the existing organizational structure of the two broad
RDCs: Agroecosystems and Agrobiodiversity. Agrobiodiversity contains all the germplasm
related research and development (Chapter 4) while Agroecosystems contains the suite of
other disciplines involved in system based research and development. In this transition, some
project areas were moved between the RDCs (e.g. tropical fruits into Agroecosystems RDC
and aspects of crop and agroecosystem health management, specifically, disease resistance
breeding, into Agrobiodiversity RDC).  
Research Leaders have been appointed for each of the RDCs and the Agroecosystems RDC
encompasses two PLs: Markets, Institutions and Livelihoods (PA1), and Integrated Soil
Fertility Management (PA2). The latter PL houses the Tropical Soils Biology Institute (TSBF)
of CIAT. Each PL contains a number of products that in large measure reflect the previous
project structure (Figure 3.1). This chapter examines the activities of the two PLs, presents a
Panel assessment of these activities, and discusses issues that present opportunities for
improvementMarkets, institutions and livelihoods
CIAT’s intent for this PL is to deliver innovations  ‐‐  mostly in the form of approaches,
methods, tools and policy options  ‐‐  that contribute to improving the effectiveness of
agricultural research and development and the uptake of research results by small scale
farmers. Above all, PA1 aims to ensure that the strategies, approaches and methods employed
and advocated by CIAT are appropriate for benefiting the hard‐to‐reach – and especially the
poor farmers in Africa, Asia and Latin America.  
PA1 addresses several aspects of the CGIAR System Priorities 3, 4 and 5, by pursuing key
research questions around systems approaches (“where to do what?”), organizational models,
and learning approaches. Products/outputs from PA1 are intended to increase the
effectiveness of other product lines of CIAT, and of the wider R&D community. It is CIAT’s
belief and experience that many of the most appropriate tools for achieving widespread
impact (both social and biophysical) need to be derived through iterative interdisciplinary
research processes. Agricultural science practice cannot be successful if it is disconnected
from development practice, and system‐based action research is often required in order to
yield innovation and robust, international public goods.  
CIAT has identified 5 products within PA1 (Figure 3.1):  
Product 1 (Institutional arrangements for increasing impact)s concerns strengthening the
organizational capacities of farmer organizations and rural service providers, particularly in
relation to the most effective approaches for improving their capacities for innovation in
order to support rural people in breaking out of the poverty trap. The research focuses on
farmer groups and higher level rural institutions by studying the effectiveness of approaches,
methods and institutional arrangements as promoters of pro‐poor interventions and change.
Product 2 (Market value chain management practices) is related to the potential to improve rural
livelihoods and alleviate poverty by improving market access. Improved understanding of
how impact occurs is used to design more effective and equitable market‐oriented R&D
interventions. The research will focus on mechanisms to link farm enterprises into the agri‐
food chain in a more equitable manner and will involve development partners, private sector
buyers, and state organizations in Latin America, Asia and Africa.  
Product 3 (High value commodities) is concerned with high value crops that reduce inequality
between resource poor and resource rich farmers while avoiding undermining of the natural
resource base. The research focuses on approaches, tools and technologies for improving the
competitiveness of smallholder producers of high value commodities including tropical
fruits. The initial research is focused on 3 model high value fruit crops in Latin America.  
Product 4 (Product and environmental quality through Integrated Pest and Disease) Management
(IPDM) is focused on the development of technologies for better product and environmental
quality through management of diseases and pests. The three key targets are tropical fruits, a
biological pesticide suitable for Africa, and a method to quantify one plant pathogenic soil‐
borne species of Pythium in Africa, initially for beans.  
31
Product 5 (Innovations for adaptation to change and vulnerability) aims to make available policy
guidelines, tools, and innovations for adaptation and resilience of agricultural systems to
situations of risk, high stress and vulnerability. Products will include improved
understanding of the natural and biological resource that provides the link to climate change,
and guidelines that improve smallholder farmers’ adaptive behavior. Better tools are needed
to identify effective development policies and associated investments that support the
implementation of profitable and resilient land uses that enhance both welfare and the
environment. The research is focused in Africa.
Overall, PA1 provides a set of core competencies necessary to support successful targeting,
systems integration, reaching end users, and impact assessment – with inputs contributing
directly through teamwork with biophysical scientists to the delivery of the outputs of CIAT’s
other product lines. The opportunities presented to increase CIAT’s reach and contributions
to poverty alleviation are the suggested justification for concentrating these core
competencies. Many of the outputs from PA1 are knowledge‐intensive innovations in the
form of methods, tools and good practice guides. Most are targeted globally or at least across
two regions, with application to development often depending upon subsequent local
adaptation, and translation.  
The engagement of local partners is critical to the success of this PL. CIAT selects partners in
research in strategic agroecological or market‐defined situations on the principle of
subsidiarity. In cases in which the local – and if possible regional ‐‐ partner is responsible for
implementation, CIAT’s role becomes that of coordinating its planning so as to arrive at
robust conclusions at the higher level.  
Panel assessment of market, institutions and livelihoods (PA1)
Two of the three CCERs conducted in 2006 related to the then project areas that now form this
PL. The CCER of CIAT’s Strategy for Natural Resource Management: Improving
Management of Agroecosystems in the Tropics (CCER‐IMAT; May 2006) reviewed the quality
and relevance of research in the Crop and Agroecosystem Health Management (PE‐1),
Integrated Soil Fertility Management (PE‐2), and Spatial and Economic Analysis for Decision
and Policy Support in Agriculture and the Environment (BP‐2) projects. The CCER on the
Rural Innovation Institute (CCER‐RII; May 2006) reviewed the quality and relevance of
research in the Rural Agroenterprise Development (SN‐1) and Participatory Research
Approaches (SN‐3) projects, and the Systemwide Program on Participatory Research and
Gender Analysis (SW‐3). These reviews provide good insight into quality issues within
projects that has been valuable in informing the EPMR Panel. In deriving broad assessments
the Panel has combined the information in the reviews with its own observations from
presentations, interviews and field visits, which are by necessity less detailed in any specific
area, but better informed in breadth across the whole institute.
The CCER‐IMAT noted the high quality of science and its relevance to CIAT’s mandate.
However, there was a concern about incomplete integration of social, economic, and
ecological analysis with technology development and testing. Panel observations are
consistent with both these findings. The CCER‐RII made many references to the weakness or
lack of research output of the RII and recommended moving from a method driven to an
issue driven approach and focus more on outputs (research leading to new insights) rather
than inputs (development action plus manuals). As the RII has been discontinued and
32
remaining staff absorbed into this product line, it remains unclear to the Panel whether the
problem has been remedied or merely dispersed.    
The Panel is of the view that the implementation of the PL concept, as manifested in this PL, will not
achieve the interdisciplinary interaction required to achieve the development outcomes of CIAT’s
mission. Indeed, the Panel believes that the suite of reorganizations implemented since the 5th
EPMR (Chapter 2) have not resulted in the necessary integration to efficiently accomplish
CIAT’s desired outcomes. The products defined here remain as disciplinary islands that
closely reflect prior discipline‐based project groupings. The Panel is concerned that effective
disciplinary integration in outcome focused teams, which is the fundamental functionality
required of CIAT research for development, is not facilitated by this organizational structure.
The structure houses component pieces and the integration to the system and problem
domain is secondary, although despite this, seemingly achieved in regional operations
(Chapter 5).
A number of the SC directives to this Panel relate directly to this issue. In particular, strategic
issue 3 for this EPMR states: A large component of CIAT’s portfolio is made up of small and discrete
activities which may lead to inefficiencies in the deployment of resources. In response to SC criticism of
having a large number of apparently unrelated projects, it appears that CIAT, rather than completing
and/or eliminating these projects, has merely subsumed them under one program. The SC encourages
the EPMR to assess how CIAT could rationalize, concentrating on fewer, well‐selected areas of
strategic international research with high potential benefit to the poor in the tropics.  
While the Panel is aware of the key role of these disciplinary research components in
delivering outcomes, and was presented with good evidence to this end (Ch. 5), the Panel
considers that the current structure encourages their operation as independent units. This
generates considerable overlap and diffusion of effort across CIAT as the independent
disciplinary units each seek to develop broadly‐based projects around their disciplinary
expertise. There is little semblance of a coherent research program. The Panel was unable to
identify a clear research strategy for the current product lines on markets, institutions and
livelihoods that would avoid this confusion and facilitate effective synergies across its
disciplines and with other disciplines across CIAT. The Panel is of the view that the
disciplinary competencies housed in market, institutions and livelihoods (PA1) would be
more effectively utilized within CIAT if they were housed within multi‐disciplinary, outcome
focused research project teams that would serve “outcome lines”, rather than in discipline
based component “products”.  
[#2] Hence, the Panel recommends that CIAT implement its research for development
agenda via a small number of outcome lines that engage multidisciplinary teams in a
system‐based approach that targets outcomes defined clearly and unambiguously in a
revised center strategic plan.  The PL on Integrated Soil Fertility Management (ISFM) in essence houses the Tropical Soil
Biology and Fertility Institute of CIAT (TSBF‐CIAT) in Africa and aims to address soil fertility
related issues and to contribute to sustainable land management. The activities are now
totally focused in Africa following the closure of the ISFM program in Latin America in 2006‐
2007. The over‐arching goals are to strengthen national and international capacity to manage
tropical ecosystems sustainably for human well‐being, with a particular focus on soil,
biodiversity and primary production; to reduce hunger and poverty in the tropical areas of
Africa through scientific research leading to new technology and knowledge; and to ensure
environmental sustainability through research on the biology and fertility of tropical soils,
targeted interventions, building scientific capability and contributions to agricultural policy
formulation and development.2  
To achieve its 3 key objectives, the work at CIAT‐TSBF is organized into five major products
(Figure 3.1). For each of these products there are specific targets for contributing to outcomes
and impacts. The outcomes and impacts are conceptualized around seven strategic pillars:
1. Improving fertilizer efficiency and developing soil and water management practices;
2. Improved germplasm as an entry point for managing soil fertility;
3. Managing the genetic resources of soil for enhanced productivity and plant health;
4. Understanding farm level social and cultural dynamics;
5. Linking farmers to markets, nutrition, and health;
6. NRM strategies to move from plot to landscape scales; and
7. Strengthening scientific and institutional capacity of partners for ISFM.
Product 1 (Biophysical and socioeconomic processes understood, principles and concepts developed for
protecting and improving the health and fertility of soils) encompasses research developing
                                                     
2 The main objectives of ISFM are to support the livelihoods of people reliant on agriculture by developing
profitable, socially‐just and resilient agricultural production systems based on Integrated Soil Fertility
Management (ISFM); to develop Sustainable Land Management (SLM) in tropical areas of Africa through
reversing land degradation; and to build the human and social capital of all CIAT‐TSBF stakeholders for
research and management on the sustainable use of tropical soils. CIAT‐TSBF addresses several aspects of
CGIAR System Priority 4: Promoting poverty alleviation and sustainable management of water, land, and
forest resources. Most effort relates to System Priority Area 4A: Promoting integrated land, water and forest
management at landscape level, but considerable effort is also dedicated to System Priority Area 4D:
Promoting sustainable agro‐ecological intensification in low‐ and high‐potential areas.
34
principles and concepts that transcend the classical boundaries of the biophysical sciences
through integration with economics, sociology and anthropology.  
Research activities from Product 2 (Economically viable and environmentally sound soil, water, and
nutrient management practices developed and tested by applying and integrating knowledge of
biophysical and socioeconomic processes) address the social, economic, and gendered dynamics of
local knowledge generation and exchange, the nature of the interface between research‐
extension, local community institutions/social networks, and evaluate the economic and
environmental impacts of current or proposed practices.  
At the center of the research‐outcome‐impact chain, Product 3 (Partnerships and tools developed
and capacity enhanced of all stakeholders for improving the health and fertility of soils) addresses the
building of human and social capital of all CIAT‐TSBF stakeholders for effective research and
sustainable management of tropical soils.  
Product 4 (Improved rural livelihoods through sustainable, profitable, diverse and intensive
agricultural production systems) represents the application of human and social capital and
networking and sound, socio‐culturally and economically relevant biophysical principles for
ISFM.  
The highest scale of the research‐for‐development activities in PA2 is found within Product 5
(Options for sustainable land management (SLM) practices for social profitability developed, with
special emphasis on reversing land degradation). These activities are dedicated to applying the
findings of all the previous outputs for restoring degraded agricultural lands to economic and
ecological productivity, enhancing ecosystem health and improving livelihoods by generating
technology, institutional, and policy innovations.
Overall, PA2 has a major focus on developing and extending technologies that support
sustainable intensification of cropping systems, especially in the dry and moist savanna,
hillside, and forest and forest margin agro‐ecological zones (AEZs) in Africa. In these AEZs,
poverty, population growth and a rising demand for food is driving expansion of cropped
area into increasingly marginal lands and/or remnant forest zones. Under these
circumstances, sustainable intensification of agriculture on already cultivated land (instead of
expanding the area under cultivation) represents the most promising solution to achieving
food and income security and protecting against natural resource degradation. The expected
beneficiaries, target ecosystems and end users are principally small‐scale crop‐livestock
farmers and extension workers, NGOs and NARS in tropical agroecosystems of Sub‐Saharan
Africa.
Panel assessment of integrated soil fertility management (PA2)
The CCER of CIAT’s Strategy for Natural Resource Management: Improving Management of
Agroecosystems in the Tropics (CCER‐IMAT; May 2006) reviewed the quality and relevance
of research in the then Integrated Soil Fertility Management (PE‐2) project that forms this
product line. The CCER was glowing in its assessment of CIAT‐TSBF:
• TSBF‐CIAT fully represents CIAT’s core mission and objectives and the research
conducted is generally of high standard.  
• TSBF has become a world leader in tropical soil fertility research and joining CIAT has
further strengthened this process.  
35
• The quality of outputs and achievements at TSBF is among the highest within CIAT and a
direct reflection of its historical institutional culture of collaboration (South‐North and
South‐South), competitiveness for international funding, and excellent scientific guidance.  
• TSBF‐Africa essentially continues to function as an almost completely grant‐funded unit.  
• TSBF has demonstrated that strategic and development objectives are not mutually
exclusive in NRM research and can in fact have synergistic effects, including maintaining
a high level of publications in international journals.  
• Top senior scientists working in TSBF‐CIAT have maintained an average publication
output of 5 to 7 journal papers per year, which is comparable to top performers in ARIs.
• TSBF has moved out of its original niche in soil biology and soil fertility research. Its new
mandate now includes ‘integration’ and ‘management’, both of which require expertise in
many disciplines.
• TSBF has established itself as a lead institution in tropical soil ecology and microbiology
research, including leadership of the Conservation and Sustainable Management of
Below‐Ground Biodiversity (CSM‐BGBD) project.
• The standing of TSBF in the global scientific community is generally excellent. TSBF‐CIAT
has wide ranging partnerships, primarily through regional networks that serve as
vehicles for field research and capacity building and generally involve strong
collaboration with NARS, national and international universities, NGOs and farmer
groups/associations.
• The merger of TSBF with CIAT has greatly enhanced the integration of CIAT germplasm
in ISFM activities, with mutual benefits for TSBF and CIAT’s commodity programs.
Advanced, adapted germplasm has become the key entry point for ISFM.
Observations of the 6th EPMR Panel from presentations, interviews and field visits, are
consistent with these findings from the more in‐depth review conducted as part of the CCER.
It is clear that TSBF‐CIAT has a well‐developed research strategy based on integrated multi‐
disciplinary teams to undertake system‐based action research and innovation that is targeted
at priority development outcomes. This strategy is concisely articulated in the document
TSBF‐CIAT’s Strategy and Work Plan, 2005‐2010.3
It is the Panel’s view that, when targeted at outcomes for small rural land‐holders in specific
agro‐ecological zones or territories that relate best to identified strategic development
opportunities for CIAT, then this multi‐  and inter‐disciplinary approach exemplifies the
concept of “outcome line” required by research for development across all of CIAT. It is likely
that a range of entry points – improved germplasm, ISFM, path to market, etc – will be
relevant in different situations. Diagnosis of the target system to identify entry point
opportunities will be a critical starting point. While TSBF‐CIAT has moved to this mode of
operation, it still operates under what is now essentially the misnomer of a soils banner.However, the Panel is of the view that the TSBF brand is so well‐known and highly regarded
that it would be folly to re‐name it to better reflect it’s now broader interdisciplinary and
system outcome focused approach. However, as alluded to in the CCER, it will be necessary
for TSBF‐CIAT to maintain a coherent approach to a small number of specific integrated
projects that are guided by CIAT’s strategic research agenda. This is considered further in
Chapter 7.
The Panel was struck by the clear contrast in approach between product lines PA1 and PA2 in
the Agroecosystems RDC. PA1 presents as discrete disciplines looking for a problem while
PA2 is problem/outcome oriented and seeking the disciplinary expertise needed for targeted
interdisciplinary research for development. The outcome line(s) already present in PA2 have
been dissected to component pieces that fit the product line concept, which may have
advantages for organizing component research and development activities within the
outcome line focus. The important distinction is that the relevance of the component
products, and their role in integration to the outcome target, is the driver of the process