working of the vision and strategic direction for CIAT. This position is summarized in the
second part of this chapter.  
These summaries along with insights obtained from a range of existing detailed review
documents and consultations with management and staff has informed and focused the
EPMR Panel deliberations. This leads the Panel to an initial clear and obvious
recommendation and to an overview of the main issues to be addressed by this EPMR, which
are summarized in the last section of this chapter.  
2.2 Evolution of CIAT’s research program and structure  
In 2000, at the time of CIAT’s Fifth External Program and Management Review, CIAT’s
research program was built on 16 projects that had provided a stable research structure since
1997. In addition, CIAT was the convenor of three systemwide or ecoregional programs.  
2002 was a time of major transitions. First, building on the strengths of CIAT’s own soils
research project and its role as convening center of the Soil Water Nutrient Management
Systemwide Program, CIAT merged with the Tropical Soils Biology Fertility Institute (TSBF)
in order to be able to more effectively address soil fertility issues in Africa. As part of this
merger, CIAT’s own soils project was folded into TSBF. Second, building on several years of
research on improving nutrient content in beans and cassava, CIAT joined with IFPRI to co‐
convene the development of a biofortification program that evolved into the Harvest Plus
Challenge Program (CP), which has the objective of contributing to overcoming micro‐
nutrient deficiencies through enhanced nutrient content in major food staples. Third, CIAT
refocused its own research structure into 15 projects with the dual objectives of streamlining
operations while responding to important new research opportunities. Rather than
continuing as a separate Sustainable Systems project, the systems approach was integrated
into other CIAT projects and the Sustainable Systems project was discontinued. Similarly, the
function of strengthening NARS was incorporated into research support units of training and
information and the NARS linkages project was discontinued. The bean research project and
the separate beans in Africa projects were successfully integrated into a single program, while
the genetic resources and the biotechnology projects were similarly integrated into a single
project. Fourth, the position of Regional Coordinator was established in Africa, Asia, and
Central America. Regional Coordinators were charged with the responsibility of working
with partners in the regions to develop a joint agenda of common interest across the range of
CIAT projects. Until then, all regional staff had worked for a single project so there was no
effective mechanism to articulate the entire range of CIAT research competencies with the
needs and priorities of NARS. Fifth, the Latin America Ecoregional Program was brought to a
close. Sixth, the Rural Innovation Institute was formed to give direction and profile to the
combined efforts of the projects on Agroenterprises, Participatory Research, and Information
for Rural Communities.
Three new projects were also launched in 2002:
• The tropical fruits project was initiated in order to take advantage of the opportunity
offered by the rapidly growing demand of high value products to increase incomes in
poor rural communities.  
• A climate change project was started in recognition of the need to cope with the massive
impact climate change will have on agriculture in the tropics.  
24
• An information for rural communities project began with the aim to develop methods to
strengthen the decision making capacity of poor rural communities with the aid of
modern information and communication technologies.
In 2004, CIAT established three Research for Development Challenges (RDCs) as platforms
for enhanced integration. These were not formal institutional structures with budget and
leadership authority. The RDCs were ‐ Sharing the Benefits of Agrobiodiversity; Overcoming
Land Degradation; and Enhancing Rural Innovation. These RDCs substantially mirrored the
broad underlying objectives of the 2001‐2010 Strategic Plan of improving rural livelihoods
through a more competitive agriculture; sustained agroecosystems health; and an enhanced
capacity of rural communities to innovate.
In addition, although CIAT never wavered in its belief in the importance of climate change to
the rural poor in the tropics, in 2004 the climate change project was deleted from the project
portfolio in response to lukewarm donor support and the failure of CGIAR to establish the
Challenge Program with which it would have partnered.
In 2005, the Soil Water Nutrient Management Systemwide Program was wrapped up by
mutual agreement of the partners. Some elements of this agenda were assumed by the Water
and Food Challenge Program, while the association of the Sub‐Saharan Africa Challenge
Program with TSBF became the focus of the soils research for Africa. Secondly, in a slight
repositioning, the Integrated Pest Management project was recast as a Crop and
Agroecosystems Health project within the Agroecosystems RDC in a change that was more
organizational and presentational than of operational research strategy. Thirdly, the scope of
the Land Degradation RDC was expanded to cover Improving Management of
Agroecosystems in the Tropics.  
After 2005 structural changes introduced were more radical and traumatic. In 2006 in reaction
to reduced unrestricted funds, both the Communities & Watersheds Project and the
Information for Rural Communities Project were discontinued. The planned outputs of these
projects were phased out of the Medium Term Plan (MTP). CIAT continued to participate in
the Water CP, leading the research theme on Water and People in Catchments. In the hope of
streamlining the organization and enhancing collaboration between economics and
geographical information systems, the Land Use and Impact Assessment Projects were
merged into a single project, but the leader was never named for this project and the unit
never become functional.Based upon the recommendations of a CCER, the Rural Innovation and Improving the
Management of Agroecosystems in the Tropics RDCs were merged into a single People &
Agroecosystems RDC. This also entailed the dissolution of the Rural Innovation Institute. At
the same time the Agroecosystems RDC as well as the Agrobiodiversity RDC were formalized
into structures with an appointed leader with budget and personnel authority. By this time,
CIAT’s research program consisted of 11 projects complemented by involvement in the
system wide initiatives on PRGA and the Harvest Plus CP.  
In 2007 in response to the recommendation of a CCER, CIAT reorganized its research around
the product concept, which is intended to better focus and integrate major elements of CIAT’s
research. The intent was not to develop a radically different research agenda. Products did
not differ greatly from outputs in the MTP so that CIAT products were presented as outputs
in the current MTP. The process of developing and disseminating products extends all the
way from assessment of demand to product design through research, testing, and fine tuning
prototype products with users, to their distribution and subsequent evaluation of impact. The
intent is for different scientists and disciplines to integrate their work to contribute different
elements to the product process at appropriate stages over the course of the product cycle.
Partnerships would provide key inputs to product development, and the roles of partners
needed to be envisaged in the design of the product development process.
To implement this approach CIAT formed 6 product lines (PL) with designated leaders
within the existing RDC structure. These PLs are complemented by CIAT’s role as convenor
of one systemwide program (PRGA) and co‐convenor of one Challenge Program (Harvest
Plus). The People & Agroecosystems RDC encompasses 2 PLs: Markets, Institutions and
Livelihoods, and the Integrated Soil Fertility Management Product Line of the Tropical Soils
Biology Institute (TSBF) of CIAT. Agrobiodiversity RDC includes 4 PLs to improve the
productivity of beans, cassava, rice, and tropical forages. The work of the former project on
conservation and use of genetic resources continues but is now presented as comprising some
of the products (outputs) of the 4 commodity PLs.
It is clear to the Panel that this state of continual flux in CIAT’s research program, while trying to
better position the institute, has resulted from poor definition of the vision and strategic direction to
guide that positioning. The current Strategic Plan is too generic and lacks sharp definitions of
targets, means and stages of development, so that it does not provide a clear road map to
guide the evolution of the Center. The recent CCERs have repeated the call of the 5th EPMR to
sharpen targets and strategies and CIAT management has begun to respond. Whether this
new attempt at focus will be more successful than past attempts is key for the future of CIAT.