network
The Alliance of Bioversity International and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) delivers research-based solutions that address the global crises of malnutrition, climate change, biodiversity loss, and environmental degradation. The Alliance focuses on the nexus of agriculture, nutrition and environment and work with local, national, and multinational partners across Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and with the public and private sectors and civil society.
The multidisciplinary and research-driven University of Leuven (KU Leuven) has been a centre of learning for almost six centuries. Its programmes divided in three groups: Biomedical Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Science, Engineering and Technology.
The university’s mission is ‘To explore the potential of nature to improve the quality of life’. It’s strength lies in its ability to join the forces of specialised research institutes and the university. It also lies in the combined efforts of the various fields of natural and social sciences. The domain of Wageningen University & Research consists of three related core areas: Food, feed & biobased production, Natural resources & living environment and
Society & well-being.The Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation, AGROSAVIA, is a decentralized public entity of mixed non-profit participation, of a scientific and technical nature, whose purpose is to work on the generation of scientific knowledge and agricultural technological development through scientific research, technology adaptation, transfer and advice Ecuador’s National Institute of Agricultural Research – INIAP is a public research institute affiliated to the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
whose primary purposes are to promote scientific research, generation, innovation, validation and dissemination of technologies in the agricultural and forestry production sector.
The Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL) is a public university located in Guayaquil, Guayas Province in Ecuador. ESPOL has five faculties or schools, fifteen research centers, and several associated centers providing twenty-six undergraduate and ten master’s degrees.
CIRAD, the French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development, is an organization working for the sustainable development of tropical and Mediterranean regions. in the South and the French overseas regions. Its research work is generally conducted in partnership.
A French public research institution, IRD supports an original model of equitable scientific partnership and interdisciplinary, citizen, sustainability science committed to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.SENASA, Peru’s National agrarian Health service is an entity attached to the Ministry of Agrarian Development and Irrigation maintains a system of Phytosanitary and Zoosanitary Surveillance, which protects the country from the entry of pests and diseases, to preserve its agricultural and livestock wealth. It has Official Authority in matters of Agrarian Health, Quality of Inputs, Organic Production and Food Safety.
The National Institute of Agrarian Innovation (INIA) is an entity attached to the Ministry of Agrarian Development and Irrigation of Peru that develops research activities, technology transfer, conservation and use of genetic resources, as well as the production of seeds, seedlings and high-value reproducers genetic. It articulates and regulates research, development and innovation (R + D + i) with the actors of the SNIA, aimed at competitiveness, food security and adaptation to climate change and formulates, proposes and executes the national policy and the agricultural innovation plan.contributing to the global cocoa industry, a global leader in the conservation and characterisation of cocoa germplasm, CRC collaborates with international researchers in pathology, molecular diagnostics and morphological characterisation. Other areas include, factors influencing chemical and sensory quality attributes, optimisation of micro-fermentations, development of cocoa quality standards, DNA fingerprinting and genetic diversity, cadmium mitigation, and improving the efficiency of propagation. CRC also supports business entrepreneurs through training programmes, such as the ever popular chocolate making course 12Tree is a pioneer for making sustainable forestry and agroforestry projects investable on a large scale for institutional investors. Their long-term objective is to create new forest and agroforest areas with a particular focus on Central and South America that are operated commercially to generate sustainable profitability for their investors and to provide ecological and social benefits for the local regions.