ver the last year, CIAT’s collaborative
research resulted in major achievements,
which are delivering tangible benefits for tropical
regions today, while also pointing the way to a
better tomorrow. This annual report describes
some of the most important gains, emphasizing
how we and our partners apply advanced
knowledge and tools to improve crops, soils, and
policies for the good of poor consumers and
farmers across the tropics and subtropics.
Leadership from within
Looking to the future, we prepared a new
strategy in 2013 (see the summary on pages
4–7), which explains how our growing research
team and networks will capitalize on past and
current work to help make agriculture more
eco-efficient in the years to come.
To meet the central development challenges of
our time – hunger and malnutrition, poverty,
environmental degradation, and climate change
– depends not just on individual achievement but
on collective success. To succeed together, we
need an approach to institutional leadership that
galvanizes commitment, fosters innovation,
promotes the development of new capacities,
and catalyzes change through strong
collaborative ties and networks.
This is the kind of leadership we hope is evident
in CIAT Strategy 2014–2020. It describes a wide
range of innovative approaches through which
the Center’s research will contribute to the
development goals of the CGIAR Consortium
– the global science partnership of which CIAT is
a member. Our contribution includes four new
strategic initiatives (page 6–7) that address
emerging challenges and opportunities through
pioneering efforts that integrate CIAT’s main
research areas. These new initiatives have the
potential to significantly influence future CGIAR
research and expand its development impact.
Ties that bind
CIAT has focused in recent years on cultivating
diverse collaborative arrangements, which are
essential for building an eco-efficient future. The
Center’s strategic partnership with the
Colombian Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development, for example, has yielded valuable
results, which better enable our host country’s
research organizations and producer
associations to confront climate change
Planning for Collective Success
Message from the Board Chair and Director General
(page 39) and achieve sustainable management
of its vast savanna region (page 42).
To derive similar benefits from other major
partnerships, we signed an agreement to boost
scientific exchanges with the Brazilian
Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa)
and also consolidated our cooperation with key
institutions in eastern Africa, Peru (page 36), and
Vietnam. In addition, CIAT staff engaged with a
wide range of universities – especially in the
Americas and Europe – aiming to unite our
strengths with theirs in a concerted campaign to
achieve global food security. Alongside these and
other initiatives with national organizations, we
also delivered on important commitments to the
private sector (page 51) and international
development agencies.
Vigorous engagement with our donors (see the
complete list on page 50) resulted in support for
major new projects. These include research to
promote climate-smart farming and restore
degraded land in Africa, strengthen agricultural
value chains in Southeast Asia and Latin
America, and develop climate-resilient beans for
smallholder farmers across continents.Big data
CIAT’s work in diverse research areas has given
rise to a formidable capacity for data collection,
management, and analysis, including an ability to
integrate different types of data across agricultural
disciplines. New science and technology will give
“big data” an even more prominent role in CIAT’s
future research, with a sharp focus on boosting
and measuring development impact. CIAT’s bioinformatics team has devised a new software tool that helps molecular geneticists
circumvent a major cost bottleneck in the analysis of genomic data. Such analysis is critical
for exploring genetic diversity and putting it to better use through gene discovery or the
development of molecular markers that can speed crop improvement.
Until now, even the most adept geneticist has needed to have a skilled specialist at her or his
elbow when using new analytical tools to navigate the huge amounts of data generated with
advanced sequencing technologies. But apparently, CIAT’s bioinformatics experts aren’t
much concerned about working themselves out of a job.
Their new tool – dubbed the Next-Generation Sequencing Eclipse Plug-in (NGSEP) – offers
a fast, accurate, and user-friendly way to analyze data from high-throughput sequencing. In
fact, it proved essential for creating the bioinformatics pipeline used to detect differences
between sequenced samples and the reference genome in the cassava population genetics
study described on page 12.
Moreover, as reported in the journal Nucleic Acids Research, NGSEP has shown “superior
accuracy and efficiency, compared with currently available packages,” when used to analyze
sequencing data from research on yeast, rice, and humans. Based on these results, the
authors confidently suggest that “NGSEP will become a strong support tool to empower the
analysis of sequencing data in a wide range of research projects on different species.”