The second meeting of the Colombian Forage Network was held from September 5 to 6, 2018 at the Nataima Research Center located in Espinal, department of Tolima, where the progress of the CIAT-Agrosavia project was announced.
CIAT's Tropical Forages team presented its breeding program and briefed participants on project activities, such as agronomic evaluation of new forage germplasm, identification of forage materials, and management practices for adaptation to drought and flooding in low and medium tropical regions, and the economic evaluation of the materials evaluated, among others.
In addition, the CIAT Data and Research Methods team presented a prototype of the Octopus program, developed to track data from research projects. Octopus aims to store and manage all information related to the CIAT-Agrosavia project, including documents, data and metadata; the flow of your pipe; and standardization and centralization of data collected under the project.
The workshop brought together experts from CIAT and national Agrosavia research centers in the areas of agronomy, zootechnics, livestock, plant breeding, plant physiology, soils, molecular biology, chemistry, and socioeconomics. The first meeting was held in early April this year at the Turipaná research center in Cereté, department of Córdoba.
Posted by nataliamarino on Mon,The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) are pleased to announce the new UK-Colombia program on tropical farming systems, supported by the Newton-Caldas Fund.
Researchers from the Autonomous University of Barcelona and the Bean Program of the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), in Colombia, have identified drought-resistant genotypes and the morphophysiological characteristics related to this resistance. The experiments were carried out in Palmira, Colombia, between June and September 2012 and 2013, and have been published in the journal Frontiers in Plant Science.
For José Arnulfo Polania, a researcher at the UAB Plant Physiology Laboratory and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, "experiments have shown that there is no dominant morphophysiological characteristic, but rather the strategic combination of several characteristics that confers resistance to drought of certain varieties of beans”. “We have determined what these specific characteristics are for each zone, depending on whether or not the soil retains the
and whether the droughts are intermittent or continuous”, adds Polania. The study has determined that strategic combination of characteristics,
key to success in breeding for drought resistance. After evaluating 36 advanced bean lines, obtained from crosses between different varieties, and based on the results of different parameters related to water use, growth and production, drought-resistant bean lines were classified into two groups: savers' and 'wasters' of water.
The Alliance of Bioversity International and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) provides scientific solutions that address global crises of malnutrition, climate change, biodiversity loss, and environmental degradation.
The Alliance focuses on the nexus between agriculture, nutrition and the environment. We work with local, national and multinational partners in Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, and with the public and private sectors and civil society. With novel collaborations, the Alliance builds evidence and integrates innovations to transform food systems and landscapes to sustain the planet, drive prosperity and nourish people in the midst of a climate crisis.
The Alliance is part of CGIAR, a global research consortium for a future without hunger, dedicated to reducing poverty, contributing to food and nutrition security, and enhancing natural resources. This project was formulated by the corporation for the participatory and sustainable development of small Colombian farmers (PBA corporation), the Colombian Agricultural Research Corporation (Corpoica) c.i tibaitatá, the international center for tropical agriculture (ciat) and two associations of small farmers (Asomudepas and San Rafael community company). It seeks to develop and implement participatory, simple, efficient and low-cost cutting-edge technologies in the production processes of clean seed, as a technological tool that allows the increase of yields, the reduction of costs and the improvement.
or the quality of the production of the small producers of cassava and yams on the Atlantic coast. Its formulation is based on four major components: the participatory selection of promising cassava and yam materials, the development and implementation of state-of-the-art technologies with small producers, the local pre-scaling of promising materials and their subsequent participatory evaluation and, finally, training in their efficient management and business aspects, focused on strengthening producer organizations and developing a business plan that ensures the implementation and sustainability of the technological innovation strategy.
Horticultural Association of C, Center for International Cooperation, International Center of Agriculture, Colombian Corporation of Inve, Federation of P Producers, APIC Foundation, Ministry of Agriculture and De, Musaceas del Quindío, University of Caldas-UCALDAS, University of Córdoba-UNICORD
Banana cultivation in recent years has lost its productive capacity and sustainability due to the lack of efficient, economical and ecological technology to improve soil fertility and crop health. With this project, ecological strategies for soil management will be developed, which will allow the control of phytosanitary problems of banana cultivation, such as Moko and phytoparasitic nematodes. The project will be developed through several evaluations that will allow establishing management options. Firstly, a strain of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) will be identified in the laboratory and nursery as a tool to improve plant resistance to disease attack and a strain of Trichoderma sp., as an antagonist of R. solanacearum, to reduce its impact. In the second phase, through a field experiment on producer farms in the department of Quindío, the efficiency of artificially obtained leachate from the decomposition of plantain crop residues will be evaluated, together with the different selected strains (AMF and Trichoderma sp.). Another option that will be evaluated in the field is the effect of applying vermicompost on the growth, development and production of plantain plants. Finally, the efficiency of Callista cordifolia and Geophila macropoda will be evaluated in relation to native weeds as soil cover, to improve fertility and control the incidence of nematodes. In this way, and having defined the options for soil and nutrition management for the control of nematodes and Ralstonia solanacearum in banana cultivation, the project will contribute to improving the competitiveness of this crop.
Preliminary studies carried out by CIAT's DAPA unit indicate that the favorability of the main rice-growing areas in Colombia is at high risk of being negatively affected by variables attributable to climate instability, affecting not only the socio-economic well-being of producers but also consumers. . Therefore, it is necessary to develop not only new germplasm that is more resilient to climate change, but also to evaluate and implement measures to mitigate climate change. This project proposes the use of eco-physiological models to evaluate the effect of changes in crop management practices and varieties in mitigating climate change in the main rice-growing areas with close participation of producers, Fedearroz and other entities of the rice chain.
Palacios, L.M., Arboleda Muñoz, G.A., Guarín, H.P., Villada Castillo, H.S, Ospina, M.A., Pizarro, M., Tran, T., (...), Dufour, D., Becerra Lopez-Lavalle, LReategui, K., Aguirre, N., Oliva, R., Aguirre, E..A. Holguín, V.A., Cuchillo, M., Mora-Delgado, J.Quintana was in good health and spirits after a two-day ordeal.

The entire Alliance community is thrilled to have Jesús safely returned home,” said Juan Lucas Restrepo, the Director General of the Alliance. “We thank Colombian officials, indigenous communities, civil society organizations, and others for swiftly mobilizing to secure his release.”

Quintana is a Spanish national who has more than 30 years of experience working in sustainable rural development. He joined the Alliance earlier this year.

An unidentified armed group abducted Quintana at an illegal roadblock in southwestern Colombia while he was on a personal trip.

The Alliance also extends its thanks to a global community of well-wishers who expressed their concern for Jesús during this difficult event,” Restrepo said.

The Alliance will provide more information when it becomes available.

The Alliance of Bioversity and CIAT is an international nonprofit organization that delivers scientific solutions that harness agricultural biodiversity and sustainably transform food systems to improve people’s lives in a climate crisis and works closely together with farmers to better their livelihoods.